<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>

<!DOCTYPE TEI.2 SYSTEM "http://www.gutenberg.org/tei/marcello/0.4/dtd/pgtei.dtd" [

<!ENTITY u5  "http://www.tei-c.org/Lite/">

]>

<TEI.2 lang="en">
<teiHeader>
  <fileDesc>
    <titleStmt>
      <title>The Works of the Emperor Julian (Vol. 2 of 2)</title>
      <author><name reg="Julian, Emperor of Rome">Julian, Emperor of Rome</name></author>
      <respStmt><resp>Translated by</resp> <name>Wilmer Cave Wright</name></respStmt>
    </titleStmt>
    <editionStmt>
      <edition n="1">Edition 1</edition>
    </editionStmt>
    <publicationStmt>
      <publisher>Project Gutenberg</publisher>
      <date>April 24, 2015</date>
      <idno type="etext-no">48768</idno>
      <availability>
        <p>This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
        most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
        whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
        the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
        www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
        to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.</p>
      </availability>
    </publicationStmt>
    <sourceDesc>
      <bibl>
        Created electronically.
      </bibl>
    </sourceDesc>
  </fileDesc>
  <encodingDesc>
  </encodingDesc>
  <profileDesc>
    <langUsage>
      <language id="en"></language>
      <language id="la"></language>
    </langUsage>
  </profileDesc>
  <revisionDesc>
    <change>
      <date value="2015-04-24">April 24, 2015</date>
      <respStmt>
        <name>
            Produced by Ted Garvin, David King, and the Online
            Distributed Proofreading Team at &lt;http://www.pgdp.net/&gt;.
        </name>
      </respStmt>
      <item>Project Gutenberg TEI edition 1</item>
    </change>
  </revisionDesc>
</teiHeader>

<pgExtensions>
  <pgStyleSheet>
    .boxed           { x-class: boxed }
    .shaded          { x-class: shaded }
    .rules           { x-class: rules; rules: all }
    .indent          { margin-left: 2 }
    .bold            { font-weight: bold }
    .italic          { font-style: italic }
    .smallcaps       { font-variant: small-caps }
  </pgStyleSheet>

  <pgCharMap formats="txt.iso-8859-1">
    <char id="U0x2014">
      <charName>mdash</charName>
      <desc>EM DASH</desc>
      <mapping>--</mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2003">
      <charName>emsp</charName>
      <desc>EM SPACE</desc>
      <mapping>  </mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2026">
      <charName>hellip</charName>
      <desc>HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS</desc>
      <mapping>...</mapping>
    </char>
  </pgCharMap>
</pgExtensions>

<text lang="en">
  <front>
    <div>
      <divGen type="pgheader" />
    </div>
    <div>
      <divGen type="encodingDesc" />
    </div>

    <div rend="page-break-before: always">
      <p rend="font-size: xx-large; text-align: center">The Works of the Emperor Julian</p>
      <p rend="font-size: xx-large; text-align: center">Volume 2</p>
      <p rend="font-size: xx-large; text-align: center">With an English Translation by</p>
      <p rend="font-size: xx-large; text-align: center">Wilmer Cave Wright</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">Harvard University Press</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">Cambridge, Massachusetts</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">1913</p>
    </div>
    <div rend="page-break-before: always">
      <head>Contents</head>
      <divGen type="toc" />
    </div>

  </front>
<body>

<div>
<p rend='text-align: center'>
 <figure url='images/cover.jpg' rend='width: 30%'>
  <figDesc>Cover Art</figDesc>
 </figure>
</p>
<p>
[Transcriber's Note: The above cover image was produced by the submitter at
Distributed Proofreaders, and is being placed into the public domain.]
</p>
</div>

<pb n='002'/><anchor id='Pg002'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Oration VI</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Introduction to Oration VI</head>

<p>
The Sixth Oration is a sermon or rather a scolding
addressed to the New Cynics, and especially to one
of their number who had ventured to defame the
memory of Diogenes. In the fourth Christian
century the Cynic mode of life was adopted by
many, but the vast majority were illiterate men
who imitated the Cynic shamelessness of manners
but not the genuine discipline, the self-sufficiency
(αὐτάρκεια) which had ennobled the lives of Antisthenes,
Diogenes and Crates. To the virtues of
these great men Julian endeavours to recall the
worthless Cynics of his day. In the two centuries
that had elapsed since Lucian wrote, for the edification
of degenerate Cynics,<note place='foot'>Cf. Bernays, <hi rend='italic'>Lukian und die Kyniker</hi>, Berlin, 1879.</note> the Life of the Cynic
Demonax, the dignified and witty friend of Epictetus,
the followers of that sect had still further deteriorated.
The New Cynics may be compared with
the worst type of mendicant friar of the Middle
Ages; and Julian saw in their assumption of
the outward signs of Cynicism, the coarse cloak,
the staff and wallet, and long hair, the same hypocrisy
and greed that characterised certain of the
Christian monks of his day.<note place='foot'>224 <hi rend='smallcaps'>c</hi>.</note> The resemblances
<pb n='003'/><anchor id='Pg003'/>
between the Christians and the Cynics had already
been pointed out by Aristides,<note place='foot'>Aristides, <hi rend='italic'>Orations</hi> 402 <hi rend='smallcaps'>d</hi>.</note> and while in Julian's
eyes they were equally impious, he has an additional
grievance against the Cynics in that they brought
discredit on philosophy. Like the Christians they
were unlettered, they were disrespectful to the gods
whom Julian was trying to restore, they had flattered
and fawned on Constantius, and far from practising
the austerities of Diogenes they were no better than
parasites on society.
</p>

<p>
In this as in the Seventh Oration Julian's aim
is to reform the New Cynics, but still more to
demonstrate the essential unity of philosophy. He
sympathised profoundly with the tenets of Cynicism,
and ranked Diogenes with Socrates as a moral
teacher. He reminds the Cynics whom he satirises
that the famous admonition of Diogenes to <q>countermark</q><note place='foot'>The precise meaning of the phrase is uncertain; it has
been suggested that it arose from the custom of altering or
<q>countermarking</q> coins so as to adapt them for the regular
currency; see 192 <hi rend='smallcaps'>c</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Oration</hi> 7. 208 <hi rend='smallcaps'>d</hi>.</note>
or <q>forge</q> a new coinage is not to be taken
as an excuse for license and impudence, but like
the Delphic precept <q>Know Thyself</q> warns all
philosophers to accept no traditional authority, no
convention that has not been examined and approved
by the reason of the individual. His conviction
that all philosophical tenets are in harmony if
rightly understood, gives a peculiar earnestness
to his Apologia for Diogenes. The reference in
the first paragraph to the summer solstice seems
to indicate that the Oration was written before
Julian left Constantinople in order to prepare
for the Persian campaign.
</p>

<p>
[Transcriber's Note: The original book had pages with Greek on the left page and the
corresponding English translation on the facing right page. In this e-book, each Greek
paragraph will be immediately followed by the English translation paragraph,
surrounded in parentheses. The Greek text contains markings such as [3] and [B]; they
are section and sub-section markings that in the original book were in the right
margin. These are different from numbers within parentheses such as (10), which are
used as footnote references in some e-book formats.]
</p>

</div>

<pb n='004'/><anchor id='Pg004'/><anchor id='Pg005'/>

<div>

<p>
ΙΟΥΛΙΑΝΟΥ ΑΥΤΟΚΡΑΤΟΡΟΣ
</p>

<p>
(Julian, Emperor)
</p>

<p>
ΕΙΣ ΤΟΥΣ ΑΠΑΙΔΕΥΤΟΥΣ ΚΥΝΑΣ
</p>

<p>
(To the Uneducated Cynics)
</p>

<p>
Ἄνω ποταμῶν, τοῦτο δὴ τὸ τῆς παροιμίας. ἀνὴρ
Κυνικὸς Διογένη φησί κενόδοξον, καὶ ψυχρολουτεῖν
οὐ βούλεται, σφόδρα ἐρρωμένος τὸ σῶμα καὶ
σφριγῶν [181] καὶ τὴν ἡλικίαν ἀκμάζων, ὡς ἂν μή τι
κακὸν λάβῃ, καὶ ταῦτα τοῦ θεοῦ ταῖς θεριναῖς
τροπαῖς ἤδη προσιόντος. ἀλλὰ καὶ τὴν ἐδωδὴν
τοῦ πολύποδος κωμῳδεῖ καί φησι τὸν Διογένη τῆς
ἀνοίας καὶ κενοδοξίας ἐκτετικέναι ἱκανὰς<note place='foot'>ἱκανὰς Naber adds.</note> δίκας
ὥσπερ ὑπὸ κωνείου τῆς τροφῆς διαφθαρέντα.
οὕτω πόρρω που σοφίας ἐλαύνει, ὥστε ἐπίσταται
σαφῶς ὅτι κακὸν ὁ θάνατος. τοῦτο δὲ ἀγνοεῖν
ὑπελάμβανεν ὁ σοφὸς Σωκράτης, ἀλλὰ καὶ μετ᾽
ἐκεῖνον Διογένης. ἀρρωστοῦντι γοῦν, φασίν,
ἀντισθένει μακρὰν καὶ δυσανάληπτον ἀρρωστίαν
ξιφίδιον ἐπέδωκεν ὁ Διογένης εἰπών· [B] εἰ φίλου
χρῄζεις ὑπουργίας. οὕτως οὐδὲν ᾤετο δεινὸν
<pb n='006'/><anchor id='Pg006'/><anchor id='Pg007'/>
ἐκεῖνος οὐδὲ ἀλγεινὸν τὸν θάνατον. ἀλλ᾽ ἡμεῖς οἱ
τὸ σκῆπτρον ἐκεῖθεν παραλαβόντες ὑπὸ μείζονος
σοφίας ἴσμεν ὅτι χαλεπὸν ὁ θάνατος, καὶ τὸ
νοσεῖν δεινότερον αὐτοῦ φαμεν<note place='foot'>φαμεν Hertlein suggests, φασι MSS.</note> τοῦ θανάτου, τὸ
ῥιγοῦν δὲ χαλεπώτερον τοῦ νοσεῖν. ὁ μὲν γὰρ
νοσῶν μαλακῶς ἔσθ᾽ ὅτε θεραπεύεται, ὥστε
γίνεσθαι τρυφὴν αὐτόχρημα τὴν ἀρρωστίαν,
ἄλλως τε κἂν ᾖ πλούσιος. [C] ἐθεασάμην τοι καὶ
αὐτὸς νὴ Δία τρυφώντάς τινας ἐν ταῖς νόσοις μᾶλλον
ἢ τούτους αὐτοὺς ὑγιαίνοντας· καίτοι γε καὶ
τότε λαμπρῶς ἐτρύφων. ὅθεν μοι καὶ παρέστη πρός
τινας τῶν ἑταίρων εἰπεῖν, ὡς τούτοις ἄμεινον ἦν
οἰκέταις γενέσθαι μᾶλλον ἢ δεσπόταις, καὶ πένεσθαι
τοῦ κρίνου γυμνοτέροις οὖσιν ἢ πλουτεῖν
ὥσπερ νῦν. ἦ γὰρ ἂν ἐπαύσαντο νοσοῦντες ἅμα
καὶ τρυφῶντες. [D] τὸ μὲν δὴ νοσοτυφεῖν καὶ νοσηλεύεσθαι
τρυφηλῶς οὑτωσί τινες ἐν καλῷ ποιοῦνται·
ἀνὴρ δὲ τοῦ κρύους ἀνεχόμενος καὶ θάλπος
καρτερῶν οὐχὶ καὶ τῶν νοσούντων ἀθλιώτερον
πράττει; ἀλγεῖ γοῦν ἀπαραμύθητα.
</p>

<p>
(Behold the rivers are flowing backwards,<note place='foot'>A proverb signifying that all is topsy-turvy: cf. Euripides,
<hi rend='italic'>Medea</hi> 413 ἄνω ποταμῶν ἱερῶν χωροῦσι παγαί.</note> as
the proverb says! Here is a Cynic who says
that Diogenes<note place='foot'>Of Sinope: he was the pupil of Antisthenes and is said
to have lived in a jar in the Metroum, the temple of the
Mother of the Gods at Athens; he died 323 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi></note> was conceited, and who refuses
to take cold baths for fear they may injure him,
though he has a very strong constitution and is
lusty and in the prime of life, and this too though
the Sun-god is now nearing the summer solstice.
Moreover he even ridicules the eating of octopus
and says that Diogenes paid a sufficient penalty
for his folly and vanity in that he perished of
this diet<note place='foot'>For the tradition that Diogenes died of eating a raw
octopus cf. Lucian, <hi rend='italic'>Sale of Creeds</hi> 10.</note> as though by a draught of hemlock.
So far indeed is he advanced in wisdom that he
knows for certain that death is an evil. Yet this
even the wise Socrates thought he did not know,
yes and after him Diogenes as well. At any rate
when Antisthenes<note place='foot'>A pupil of Socrates and founder of the Cynic sect.</note> was suffering from a long and
incurable illness Diogenes handed him a dagger
with these words, <q>In case you need the aid of
a friend.</q> So convinced was he that there is
nothing terrible or grievous in death. But we
who have inherited his staff know out of our greater
wisdom that death is a calamity. And we say
that sickness is even more terrible than death,
and cold harder to bear than sickness. For the
man who is sick is often tenderly nursed, so that
his ill-health is straightway converted into a luxury,
especially if he be rich. Indeed I myself, by Zeus,
have observed that certain persons are more luxurious
in sickness than in health, though even in health
they were conspicuous for luxury. And so it once
occurred to me to say to certain of my friends
that it were better for those men to be servants
than masters, and to be poor and more naked
than the lily of the field<note place='foot'>A proverb, but Julian may allude to <hi rend='italic'>Matthew</hi> 6. 28.</note> than to be rich as
they now are. For they would have ceased being
at once sick and luxurious. The fact is that some
people think it a fine thing to make a display of
their ailments and to play the part of luxurious
invalids. But, says someone, is not a man who has
to endure cold and to support heat really more
miserable than the sick? Well, at any rate he has
no comforts to mitigate his sufferings.)
</p>

<p>
Δεῦρο οὖν ἡμεῖς ὑπὲρ τῶν Κυνικῶν ὁπόσα διδασκάλων
ἠκούσαμεν ἐν κοινῷ καταθῶμεν σκοπεῖν
τοῖς ἐπὶ τὸν βίον ἰοῦσι τοῦτον· οἷς εἰ μὲν πεισθεῖεν,
εὖ οἶδα, [182] οὐδὲν οἵ γε νῦν ἐπιχειροῦντες
κυνίζειν ἔσονται χείρους· ἀπειθοῦντες δὲ εἰ μέν
τι λαμπρὸν καὶ σεμνὸν ἐπιτηδεύσειαν, ὑπερφωνοῦντες
τὸν λόγον τὸν ἡμέτερον, οὔτι τοῖς
<pb n='008'/><anchor id='Pg008'/><anchor id='Pg009'/>
ῥήμασιν ἀλλὰ τοῖς ἔργοις, οὐδὲν ἐμπόδιον ὃ γε
ἡμέτερος οἴσει λόγος· εἰ δὲ ὑπὸ λιχνείας ἢ
μαλακίας ἤ, τὸ κεφάλαιον ἵν᾽ εἴπω ξυνελὲν ἐν
βραχεῖ, τῆς σωματικῆς ἡδονῆς δεδουλωμένοι τῶν
λόγων ὀλιγωρήσειαν προσκαταγελάσαντες, [B] ὥσπερ
ἐνίοτε τῶν παιδευτηρίων καὶ τῶν δικαστηρίων οἱ
κύνες τοῖς προπυλαίοις προσουροῦσιν, οὐ φροντὶς
Ἰπποκλείδῃ· καὶ γὰρ οὐδὲ τῶν κυνιδίων ἡμῖν
μέλει τὰ τοιαῦτα πλημμελούντων. δεῦρο οὖν
ἄνωθεν ἐν κεφαλαίοις διεξέλθωμεν ἐφεξῆς τὸν
λόγον, ἵνα ὑπὲρ ἑκάστου τὸ προσῆκον ἀποδιδόντες
αὐτοί τε εὐκολώτερον ἀπεργασώμεθα τοῦθ᾽ ὅπερ
διενοήθημεν καὶ σοὶ ποιήσωμεν εὐπαρακολούθητον.
οὐκοῦν ἐπειδὴ [C] τὸν κυνισμὸν εἶδός τι φιλοσοφίας
εἶναι συμβέβηκεν, οὔτι φαυλότατον οὐδὲ ἀτιμότατον,
ἀλλὰ τοῖς κρατίστοις ἀνάμιλλον, ὀλίγα
πρότερον ὑπὲρ αὐτῆς ῥητέον ἡμῖν ἐστι τῆς
φιλοσοφίας.
</p>

<p>
(Come now, let me set down for the benefit of
the public what I learned from my teachers about
the Cynics, so that all who are entering on this
mode of life may consider it. And if they are
convinced by what I say, those who are now
aiming to be Cynics will, I am sure, be none
the worse for it: and if they are unconvinced
but cherish aims that are brilliant and noble,
and set themselves above my argument not in
words only but in deeds, then my discourse will
at any rate put no hindrance in their way. But
if there are others already enslaved by greed or
self-indulgence, or to sum it up briefly in a single
phrase, by the pleasures of the body, and they therefore
neglect my words or even laugh them down&mdash;just
as dogs sometimes defile the front porticoes of schools
and law-courts,&mdash;<q>'Tis all one to Hippocleides,</q><note place='foot'>Herodotus 6.129; Hippocleides, when told by Cleisthenes
that by his unbecoming method of dancing he had <q>danced
away his marriage,</q> made this answer which became a
proverb.</note>
for indeed we take no notice of puppies who
behave in this fashion. Come then let me pursue
my argument under headings from the beginning
in due order, so that by giving every question
its proper treatment I may myself more conveniently
achieve what I have in mind and may make it
more easy for you also to follow. And since it
is a fact that Cynicism is a branch of philosophy,
and by no means the most insignificant or least
honourable, but rivalling the noblest, I must first
say a few words about philosophy itself.)
</p>

<p>
Ἡ τῶν θεῶν εἰς ἀνθρώπους δόσις ἅμα φανοτάτῳ
πυρὶ διὰ Προμηθέως καταπεμφθεῖσα<note place='foot'>καταπεμφθεῖσα Reiske would add.</note> ἐξ ἡλίου
μετὰ τῆς Ἑρμοῦ μερίδος οὐχ ἕτερον ἐστι παρὰ
τὴν τοῦ λόγου καὶ νοῦ διανομήν· ὁ γάρ τοι
Προμηθεύς, ἡ πάντα ἐπιτροπεύουσα τὰ θνητὰ
πρόνοια, [D] πνεῦμα ἔνθερμον ὥσπερ ὄργανον ὑποβάλλουσα
τῇ φύσει, ἅπασι μετέδωκεν ἀσωμάτου
λόγου· μετέσχε δὲ ἕκαστον οὗπερ ἠδύνατο,
τὰ μὲν ἄψυχα σώματα τῆς ἕξεως μόνον, τὰ φυτὰ
δὲ ἤδη καὶ τῆς ζωῆς<note place='foot'>τῆς ζωῆς Wright σώματος Hertlein, MSS. Petavius
suspects corruption.</note> τὰ ζῷα δὲ ψυχῆς, ὁ δὲ
<pb n='010'/><anchor id='Pg010'/><anchor id='Pg011'/>
ἄνθρωπος καὶ λογικῆς ψυχῆς. εἰσὶ μὲν οὖν οἳ
μίαν οὄονται διὰ τούτων πάντων ἥκειν φύσιν, εἰσὶ
δὲ οἱ καὶ κατ᾽ εἶδος ταῦτα διαφέρειν. ἀλλὰ μήπω
τοῦτο, μᾶλλον δὲ μηδὲ ἐν τῷ νῦν λόγῳ τοῦτο ἐξεταζέσθω,
πλὴν ἐκείνου χάριν, [183] ὅτι, τὴν φιλοσοφίαν
εἴθ᾽, ὥσπερ τινὲς ὑπολαμβάνουσι, τέχνην τεχνῶν
καὶ ἐπιστήμην ἐπιστημῶν, εἴτε ὁμοίωσιν θεῷ<note place='foot'>θεῷ Klimek, θεῶν Hertlein, MSS.</note> κατὰ
τὸ δυνατόν, εἴθ᾽, ὅπερ ὁ Πύθιος ἔφη, τὸ Γνῶθι
σαυτὸν ὑπολάβοι τις, οὐδὲν διοίσει πρὸς τὸν
λόγον· ἅπαντα γὰρ ταῦτα φαίνεται πρὸς ἄλληλα
καὶ μάλα οἰκείως ἔχοντα.
</p>

<p>
(The gift of the gods sent down to mankind with
the glowing flame of fire<note place='foot'>An echo of Plato, <hi rend='italic'>Philebus</hi> 16 <hi rend='smallcaps'>c</hi>; cf. Themistius 338 <hi rend='smallcaps'>c</hi>.</note> from the sun through the
agency of Prometheus along with the blessings that
we owe to Hermes<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi> eloquence, commerce, and social intercourse.</note> is no other than the bestowal of
reason and mind. For Prometheus, the Forethought
that guides all things mortal by infusing into nature
a fiery breath to serve as an operative cause, gave
to all things a share in incorporeal reason. And
each thing took what share it could; lifeless bodies
only a state of existence; plants received life besides,
and animals soul, and man a reasoning soul. Now
some think that a single substance is the basis of
all these, and others that they differ essentially according
to their species. But this question we must
not discuss as yet, or rather not at all in the present
discourse, and we need only say that whether one
regards philosophy, as some people do, as the
art of arts and the science of sciences or as an
effort to become like God, as far as one may, or
whether, as the Pythian oracle said, it means <q>Know
thyself,</q> will make no difference to my argument.
For all these definitions are evidently very closely
related to one another.)
</p>

<p>
Ἀρξώμεθα δὲ πρῶτον ἀπὸ τοῦ Γνῶθι σαυτόν,
ἐπειδὴ καὶ θεῖόν ἐστι τοῦτο τὸ παρακέλευσμα.
οὐκοῦν ὁ γιγνώσκων [B] αὑτὸν εἴσεται μὲν περὶ ψυχῆς,
εἴσεται δὲ καὶ περὶ σώματος. καὶ τοῦτο οὐκ
ἀρκέσει μόνον, ὡς ἔστιν ἄνθρωπος ψυχὴ χρωμένη
σώματι, μαθεῖν, ἀλλὰ καὶ αὐτῆς τῆς ψυχῆς ἐπελεύσεται
τὴν οὐσίαν, ἔπειτα ἀνιχνεύσει τὰς
δυνάμεις. καὶ οὐδὲ τοῦτο μόνον ἀρκέσει αὐτῷ,
ἀλλὰ καί, εἴ τι τῆς ψυχῆς ἐν ἡμῖν ἐστι κρεῖττον
καὶ θειότερον, ὅπερ δὴ πάντες ἀδιδάκτως πειθόμενοι
θεῖόν τι εἶναι νομίζομεν, [C] καὶ τοῦτο ἐνιδρῦσθαι
πάντες οὐρανῷ κοινῶς ὑπολαμβάνομεν. ἐπιὼν
δὲ αὖθις τὰς ἀρχὰς τοῦ σώματος σκέψεται, εἴτε
σύνθετον εἴτε ἁπλοῦν ἐστιν· εἶτα ὁδῷ προβαίνων
ὑπέρ τε ἁρμονίας αὐτοῦ καὶ πάθους καὶ δυνάμεως
καὶ πάντων ἁπλῶς ὧν δεῖται πρὸς διαμονήν.
ἐπιβλέψει δὲ τὸ μετὰ τοῦτο καὶ ἀρχαῖς τεχνῶν
<pb n='012'/><anchor id='Pg012'/><anchor id='Pg013'/>
ἐνίων, ὑφ᾽ ὧν βοηθεῖται πρὸς διαμονὴν τὸ σῶμα,
οἷον ἰατρικῆς, [D] γεωργίας, ἑτέρων τοιούτων. οὐ μὴν
οὐδὲ τῶν ἀχρήστων καὶ περιττῶν τι παντάπασιν
ἀγνοήσει, ἐπεὶ καὶ ταῦτα<note place='foot'>ταῦτα Hertlein suggests, τὰ MSS.</note> πρὸς κολακείαν τοῦ
παθητικοῦ τῆς ψυχῆς ἡμῶν ἐπινενόηται. προσλιπαρῆσαι
μὲν γὰρ τούτοις ἀποκνήσει αἰσχρὸν
οἰόμενος τὸ τοιοῦτον, τὸ δοκοῦν ἐργῶδες ἐν αὐτοῖς
φεύγων· τὸ δ᾽ ὅλον ὁποῖα ἄττα δοκεῖ καὶ οἷστισιν
ἁρμόττει τῆς ψυχῆς μέρεσιν, οὐκ ἀγνοήσει. σκόπει
δή, εἰ μὴ τὸ ἑαυτὸν γνῶναι πάσης μὲν ἐπιστήμης,
πάσης δὲ τέχνης ἡγεῖταί τε ἅμα καὶ τοὺς καθόλου
λόγους συνείληφε. [184] τά τε γὰρ θεῖα διὰ τῆς ἐνούσης
ἡμῖν θείας μερίδος τά τε θνητὰ διὰ τῆς θνητοειδοῦς
μοίρας πρὸς τούτοις †προσήκειν ἔφη τὸ μεταξὺ
τούτων ζῷον εἰδέναι, τὸν ἄνθρωπον†,<note place='foot'>προσήκειν&mdash;ἄνθρωπον, Hertlein suggests, cf. Maximus of
Tyre 4. 7; ἔφη τὰ μεταξὺ τοῦ ζῷον εἶναι τὸν ἄνθρωπον MSS.</note> τῷ μὲν καθ᾽
ἕκαστον θνητόν, τῷ παντὶ δὲ ἀθάνατον, καὶ μέντοι
καὶ τὸν ἕνα καὶ τὸν καθ᾽ ἕκαστον συγκεῖσθαι ἐκ
θνητῆς καὶ ἀθανάτου μερίδος.
</p>

<p>
(However, let us begin with <q>Know thyself,</q>
since this precept is divinely inspired.<note place='foot'>Cf. 188 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b</hi>; Juvenal, <hi rend='italic'>Satires</hi> 11. 27; E caelo descendit
γνῶθι σεαυτόν.</note> It follows
that he who knows himself will know not only about
his soul but his body also. And it will not be enough
to know that a man is a soul employing a body, but
he will also investigate the essential nature of the
soul, and then trace out its faculties. And not even
this alone will be enough for him, but in addition he
will investigate whatever exists in us nobler and
more divine than the soul, that something which we
all believe in without being taught and regard as
divine, and all in common suppose to be established
in the heavens. Then again, as he investigates the
first principles of the body he will observe whether
it is composite or simple; then proceeding systematically
he will observe its harmony and the
influences that affect it and its capacity and, in a
word, all that it needs to ensure its permanence.
And in the next place he will also observe the first
principles of certain arts by which the body is
assisted to that permanence, for instance, medicine,
husbandry and the like. And of such arts as are
useless and superfluous he will not be wholly
ignorant, since these too have been devised to
humour the emotional part of our souls. For
though he will avoid the persistent study of these
last, because he thinks such persistent study disgraceful,
and will avoid what seems to involve hard work
in those subjects; nevertheless he will not, generally
speaking, remain in ignorance of their apparent
nature and what parts of the soul they suit. Reflect
therefore, whether self-knowledge does not control
every science and every art, and moreover whether
it does not include the knowledge of universals. For
to know things divine through the divine part in
us, and mortal things too through the part of us
that is mortal&mdash;this the oracle declared to be the
duty of the living organism that is midway between
these, namely man; because individually he is
mortal, but regarded as a whole he is immortal, and
moreover, singly and individually, is compounded of
a mortal and an immortal part.)
</p>

<p>
Ὅτι μέντοι καὶ τὸ τῷ θεῲ κατὰ δύναμιν ὁμοιοῦσθαι
οὐκ ἄλλο τί ἐστιν ἢ τὸ τὴν ἐφικτὴν ἀνθρώποις
γνῶσιν τῶν ὄντων περιποιήσασθαι, πρόδηλον
ἐντεῦθεν. [B] οὐ γὰρ ἐπὶ πλούτῳ χρημάτων τὸ θεῖον
μακαρίζομεν οὐδὲ ἐπ᾽ ἄλλῳ τινὶ τῶν νομιζομένων
ἀγαθῶν, ἀλλ᾽ ὅπερ Ὅμηρός φησι
</p>

<p>
(Further, that to make oneself like God as far as
possible is nothing else than to acquire such knowledge
of the essential nature of things as is attainable
by mankind, is evident from the following. It is not
on the score of abundance of possessions that we
count the divine nature happy, nor on the score of
any other of those things that are commonly believed
to be advantages, but it is because, as Homer says,)
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<lg>
<l>θεοὶ δέ τε πάντα ἴσασι,</l>
</lg>

<p>
(<q>The gods know all things</q>;<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Odyssey</hi> 4. 379.</note>)
</p>

</quote>

<p>
καὶ μέντοι καὶ περὶ Διὸς
</p>

<p>
(and indeed he says
also of Zeus,)
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<lg>
<l>ἀλλὰ Ζεὺς πρότερος γεγόνει καὶ πλείονα ᾔδει·</l>
</lg>

<p>
(<q>But Zeus was older and wiser.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Iliad</hi> 13. 355.</note>)
</p>

</quote>

<pb n='014'/><anchor id='Pg014'/><anchor id='Pg015'/>

<p>
[C] ἐπιστήμῃ γὰρ ἡμῶν οἱ θεοὶ διαφέρουσιν. ἡγεῖται
γὰρ ἴσως καὶ αὐτοῖς τῶν καλῶν τὸ αὑτοὺς γινώσκειν·
ὄσῳ δὴ κρείττονες ἡμῶν εἰσι τὴν οὐσίαν,
τοσούτῳ γνόντες ἑαυτοὺς ἴσχουσι βελτιόνων γνώσιν.
μηδεὶς οὖν ἡμῖν τὴν φιλοσοφίαν εἰς πολλὰ
διαιρείτω μηδὲ εἰς πολλὰ τεμνέτω, μᾶλλον δὲ μὴ
πολλὰς ἐκ μιᾶς ποιείτω. ὥσπερ γὰρ ἀλήθεια μία,
οὕτω δὲ καὶ φιλοσοφία μία· θαυμαστὸν δὲ οὐδέν,
εἰ κατ᾽ ἄλλας καὶ ἄλλας ὁδοὺς ἐπ᾽ αὐτὴν πορευόμεθα.
ἐπεὶ κἄν, [D] εἴ τις θέλοι τὼν ξένων ἢ ναὶ μὰ
Δία τῶν πάλαι πολιτῶν ἐπανελθεῖν εἰς Ἀθήνας,
δύναιτο μὲν καὶ πλεῖν καὶ βαδίζειν, ὁδεύων δὲ
οἶμαι διὰ γῆς ἢ ταῖς πλατείαις χρῆσθαι λεωφόροις
ἢ ταῖς ἀτραποῖς καὶ συντόμοις ὁδοῖς· καὶ πλεῖν
μέντοι δυνατὸν παρὰ τοὺς αἰγιαλούς, καὶ δὴ καὶ
κατὰ τὸν Πύλιον γέροντα τέμνοντα πέλαγος μέσον.
μὴ δὲ τοῦτό τις ἡμῖν προφερέτω, εἴ τινες τῶν κατ᾽
αὐτὰς ἰόντων τὰς ὁδοὺς ἀπεπλανήθησαν καὶ ἀλλαχοῦ
που γενόμενοι, [185] καθάπερ ὑπὸ τῆς Κίρκης ἢ
τῶν Λωτοφάγων ἡδονῆς ἢ δόξης ᾿ἤ τινος ἄλλου
δελεασθέντες, ἀπελείφθησαν τοῦ πρόσω βαδίζειν
καὶ ἐφικνεῖσθαι τοῦ τέλους, τοὺς πρωτεύσαντας δὲ
ἐν ἑκάστῃ τῶν αἱρέσεων σκοπείτω, καὶ πάντα
εὑρήσει σύμφωνα.
</p>

<p>
(For it is in knowledge that the gods surpass ourselves.
And it may well be that with them also what ranks
as noblest is self-knowledge. In proportion then as
they are nobler than we in their essential nature, that
self-knowledge of theirs is a knowledge of higher
things. Therefore, I say, let no one divide philosophy
into many kinds or cut it up into many parts, or
rather let no one make it out to be plural instead of
one. For even as truth is one, so too philosophy is
one. But it is not surprising that we travel to it
now by one road, now by another. For if any
stranger, or, by Zeus, any one of her oldest inhabitants
wished to go up to Athens, he could either
sail or go by road, and if he travelled by land he
could, I suppose, take either the broad highways or
the paths and roads that are short cuts. And
moreover he could either sail along the coasts or,
like the old man of Pylos,<note place='foot'>Nestor; <hi rend='italic'>Odyssey</hi> 3. 174.</note> <q>cleave the open sea.</q>
And let no one try to refute me by pointing out that
some philosophers in travelling by those very roads
have been known to lose their way, and arriving
in some other place have been captivated, as though
by Circe or the Lotus-Eaters, that is to say by
pleasure or opinion or some other bait, and so have
failed to go straight forward and attain their goal.
Rather he must consider those who in every one of
the philosophic sects did attain the highest rank, and
he will find that all their doctrines agree.)
</p>

<p>
Οὐκοῦν ὁ μὲν ἐν Δελφοῖς θεὸς τὸ Γνῶθι σαυτὸν
προαγορεύει, Ἡράκλειτος δὲ <q>ἐδιζησάμην ἐμεωυτόν,</q>
ἀλλὰ καὶ Πυθαγόρας οἵ τε ἀπ᾽ ἐκείνου
μέχρι Θεοφράστου τὸ κατὰ δύναμιν ὁμοιοῦσθαι
θεῷ φασι, καὶ γὰρ καὶ Ἀριστοτέλης. ὃ γὰρ ἡμεῖς
<pb n='016'/><anchor id='Pg016'/><anchor id='Pg017'/>
ποτέ, τοῦτο ὁ θεὸς ἀεί. γελοῖον οὖν ἂν εἴη τὸν
θεὸν ἑαυτὸν μὴ εἰδέναι· κομιδῇ γὰρ οὐδὲν εἴσεται
τῶν ἄλλων, εἴπερ ἑαυτὸν ἀγνοοίη· πάντα γὰρ
αὐτός ἐστιν, εἴπερ καὶ ἐν ἑαυτῷ καὶ παρ᾽ ἑαυτῷ
ἔχει τῶν ὁπωσοῦν ὄντων τὰς αἰτίας, εἴτε ἀθανάτων
ἀθανάτους, εἴτε ἐπικήρων οὐ θνητὰς οὐδὲ ἐπικήρους,
ἀιδίους δὲ καὶ μενούσας ἀεὶ καὶ αἳ τούτοις
εἰσὶν αἰτίαι τῆς ἀειγενεσίας. [C] ἀλλ᾽ οὗτος μὲν ὁ
λόγος ἐστὶ μείζων.
</p>

<p>
(Therefore the god at Delphi proclaims, <q>Know
Thyself,</q> and Heracleitus says, <q>I searched myself</q>;<note place='foot'>Heracleitus <hi rend='italic'>fr.</hi> 80.</note>
and Pythagoras also and his school and his
followers down to Theophrastus, bid us become like
God as far as possible, yes and Aristotle too. For what
we are sometimes, God is always.<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Oration</hi> 4. 143 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a</hi>.</note> It would therefore
be absurd that God should not know himself.
For he will know nothing at all about other things if
he be ignorant of himself. For he is himself everything,
seeing that in himself and near himself he
keeps the causes of all things that in any way whatever
have existence, whether they be immortal
causes of things immortal, or causes of perishable
things, though themselves not mortal or perishable;
for imperishable and ever-abiding are the causes
of perpetual generation for the perishable world.
But this line of argument is too lofty for the
occasion.)
</p>

<p>
Ὅτι δὲ μία τέ ἐστιν ἀλήθεια καὶ φιλοσοφία μία
καὶ ταύτης εἰσὶν ἐρασταὶ ξύμπαντες ὧν τε ὑπεμνήσθην
μικρῷ πρότερον ὧν τε ἐν δίκῃ νῦν εἴποιμι ἂν
τοὔνομα, τοὺς τοῦ Κιτιέως ὁμιλητὰς λέγω, οἳ τὰς
πόλεις ἰδόντες ἀποδιδρασκούσας τὸ λίαν ἀκραιφνὲς
καὶ καθαρὸν τῆς ἐλευθερίας τοῦ κυνὸς ἐσκέπασαν
αὐτὸν [D] ὥσπερ οἶμαι παραπετάσμασιν
οἰκονομίᾳ καὶ τῇ χρηματιστικῇ καὶ τῇ πρὸς τὴν
γυναῖκα συνόδῳ καὶ παιδοτροφίᾳ, ἴν᾽ οἶμαι ταῖς
πόλεσιν αὐτὸν ἐγγύθεν ἐπιστήσωσι φύλακα· ὅτι
δὲ τὸ Γνῶθι σαυτὸν κεφάλαιον τίθενται φιλοσοφίας,
οὐ μόνον ἐξ ὧν κατεβάλλοντο ξυγγραμμάτων
ὑπὲρ αὐτοῦ τοῦτου πεισθείης ἄν, εἴπερ ἐθέλοις,
<pb n='018'/><anchor id='Pg018'/><anchor id='Pg019'/>
ἀλλὰ πολὺ πλέον ἀπὸ τοῦ τῆς φιλοσοφίας τέλους·
τὸ γὰρ ὁμολογουμένως [186] ζῆν τῇ φύσει τέλος ἐποιήσαντο,
οὗπερ οὐχ οἷόv τε τυχεῖν τὸν ἀγνοοῦντα,
τίς καὶ ὁποῖος πέφυκεν· ὁ γὰρ ἀγνοῶν ὅστις
ἐστίν, οὐκ εἴσεται δήπουθεν ὅ, τι πράττειν ἑαυτῷ
προσήκει, ὥσπερ οὐδ᾽ ὁ<note place='foot'>οὐδ᾽ ὁ Hertlein suggests, οὐδὲ MSS.</note> τὸν σίδηρον ἀγνοῶν
εἴσεται, εἴτε αὐτῷ τέμνειν εἴτε μὴ προσήκει, καὶ
ὅτου δεῖ τῷ σιδήρῳ πρὸς τὸ δύνασθαι τὸ ἑαυτοῦ
πράττειν· ἀλλ᾽ ὅτι μὲν ἡ φιλοσοφία μία τέ ἐστι καὶ
πάντες ὡς ἔπος εἰπεῖν ἑνός τινος ἐφιέμενοι ὁδοῖς ἐπὶ
τοῦτο διαφόροις ἦλθον, [B] ἀπόχρη τοσαῦτα νῦν εἰπεῖν.
ὑπὲρ δὲ τοῦ Κυνισμοῦ σκεπτέον ἔτι.<note place='foot'>ἔτι Hertlein suggests, ἤδη Reiske, ἐστὶν MSS.</note>
</p>

<p>
(Now truth is one and philosophy is one, and they
whom I just now spoke of are its lovers one and all;
and also they whom I ought in fairness to mention now
by name, I mean the disciples of the man of Citium.<note place='foot'>Zeno of Citium in Cyprus, the founder of the Stoic
school.</note>
For when they saw that the cities of Greece were
averse to the excessive plainness and simplicity of the
Cynic's freedom of manners, they hedged him about
with screens as it were, I mean with maxims on the
management of the household and business and
intercourse with one's wife and the rearing of
children, to the end, I believe, that they might make
him the intimate guardian of the public welfare.<note place='foot'>Julian seems to mean that Zeno and the Stoics could not
accept without modification the manner of life advocated by
the Cynic Crates.</note>
And that they too held the maxim <q>Know Thyself</q>
to be the first principle of their philosophy you may
believe, if you will, not only from the works that
they composed on this very subject, but even more
from what they made the end and aim of their
philosophic teaching. For this end of theirs was life
in harmony with nature, and this it is impossible for
any man to attain who does not know who and of
what nature he is. For a man who does not know
himself will certainly not know what it is becoming
for him to do; just as he who does not know the
nature of iron will not know whether it is suitable
to cut with or not, and how iron must be treated so
that it may be put to its proper use. For the
moment however I have said enough to show that
philosophy is one, and that, to speak generally, all
philosophers have a single aim though they arrive
at that aim by different roads. And now let us
consider the Cynic philosophy.)
</p>

<p>
Εἰ μὲν οὖν ἐπεποίητο τοῖς ἀνδράσι μετά τινος
σπουδῆς, ἀλλὰ μὴ μετὰ παιδιᾶς τὰ συγγράμματα,
τούτοις ἐχρῆν ἑπόμενον ἐπιχειρεῖν ἕκαστα ὧν
διανοούμεθα περὶ τοῦ πράγματος ἐξετάζειν τὸν
ἐναντίον καὶ, εἰ μὲν ἐφαίνετο τοῖς παλαιοῖς ὁμολογοῦντα,
μήτοι ψευδομαρτυριῶν ἡμῖν ἐπισκήπτειν,
εἰ δὲ μή, τότε ἐξορίζειν αὐτὰ τῆς ἀκοῆς ὥσπερ
Ἀθηναῖοι τὰ ψευδῆ γράμματα τοῦ Μητρῴου.
ἐπεὶ δὲ οὐδὲν ἐστιν, [C] ὡς ἔφην, τοιοῦτον· αἵ τε γὰρ
θρυλούμεναι Διογένους τραγῳδίαι Φιλίσκου τινὸς
Αἰγινήτου λέγονται εἶναι, καί, εἰ Διογένους δὴ<note place='foot'>δὴ Hertlein suggests, δὲ MSS.</note>
εἶεν, οὐδὲν ἄτοπόν ἐστι τὸν σοφὸν παίζειν, ἐπεί
καὶ τοῦτο πολλοὶ φαίνονται τῶν φιλοσόφων
<pb n='020'/><anchor id='Pg020'/><anchor id='Pg021'/>
ποιήσαντες· ἐγέλα τοι, φασί, καὶ Δημόκριτος
ὁρῶν σπουδάζοντας τοὺς ἀνθρώπους· μὴ δὴ πρὸς
τὰς παιδιὰς αὐτῶν ἀποβλέπωμεν, ὥσπερ οἱ
μανθάνειν τι [D] σπουδαῖον ἥκιστα ἐρῶντες, πόλει
παραβάλλοντες εὐδαίμονι, πολλῶν μὲν ἱερῶν,
πολλῶν δὲ ἀπορρήτων τελετῶν πλήρει, καὶ
μυρίων ἔνδον ἱερέων ἁγνῶν ἐν ἁγνοῖς μενόντων
χωρίοις· αὐτοῦ δὲ ἕνεκα πολλάκις τούτου, λέγω
δὲ τοῦ καθαρεύειν τὰ εἴσω πάντα, τὰ περιττὰ
καὶ βδελυρὰ καὶ φαῦλα τῆς πόλεως ἀπεληλακόσι,<note place='foot'>ἀπεληλακόσι Naber, ἀπεληλάκασι Hertlein, MSS.</note>
λουτρὰ δημόσια καὶ χαμαιτυπεῖα καὶ καπηλεῖα
καὶ πάντα ἁπλῶς τὰ τοιαῦτα· εἶτα ἄχρι τούτου
γενόμενοι εἴσω μὴ παρίασιν.<note place='foot'>παρίασιν Cobet, παριᾶσιν Hertlein, MSS.</note> ὁ μὲν γὰρ τοῖς
τοιούτοις ἐντυχών, [187] εἶτα τοῦτο οἰηθεὶς εἶναι τὴν
πόλιν ἄθλιος μὲν ἀποφυγών, ἀθλιώτερος δὲ κάτω
μείνας, ἐξὸν ὑπερβάντα μικρὸν ἰδεῖν τὸν Σωκράτη·
χρήσομαι γὰρ ἐκείνοις ἐγὼ τοῖς ῥήμασιν, οἷς
Ἀλκιβιάδης ἐπαινῶν Σωκράτη. φημὶ γὰρ δὴ τὴν
Κυνικὴν φιλοσοφίαν ὁμοιοτάτην εἶναι τοῖς Σειληνοῖς
τούτοις τοῖς ἐν τοῖς ἑρμογλυφείοις καθημένοις,
οὕστινας ἐργάζονται οἱ δημιουργοὶ σύριγγας
ἢ αὐλοὺς ἔχοντας· οἳ διχάδε<note place='foot'>οἳ διχάδε Hertlein suggests, cf. <hi rend='italic'>Symposium</hi> 215, οἱ δὲ
MSS.</note> [B] διοιχθέντες
ἔνδον φαίνονται ἀγάλματα ἔχοντες θεῶν. ὡς ἂν
οὖν μὴ τοιοῦτόν τι πάθωμεν, ὅσα ἔπαιξε ταῦτα
αὐτὸν ἐσπουδακέναι νομίσαντες· ἔστι μὲν γάρ τι
καὶ ἐν ἐκείνοις οὐκ ἄχρηστον, ὁ Κυνισμὸς δέ ἐστιν
<pb n='022'/><anchor id='Pg022'/><anchor id='Pg023'/>
ἕτερον, ὡς αὐτίκα μάλα δεῖξαι πειράσομαι· δεῦρο
ἴδωμεν ἐφεξῆς ἀπὸ τῶν ἔργων, ὥσπερ αἱ ἐξιχνεύουσαι
κύνες μεταθέουσι τὰ θηρία.
</p>

<p>
(If the Cynics had composed treatises with any
serious purpose and not merely with a frivolous aim,
it would have been proper for my opponent to be
guided by these and to try in each case to refute
the opinions that I hold on the subject; and then,
if they proved to be in harmony with those original
doctrines, he could not attack me for bearing
false witness; but if they proved not to be in
harmony, then he could have barred my opinions
from a hearing, as the Athenians barred spurious
documents from the Metroum.<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Oration</hi> 5. 159 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b</hi>.</note> But, as I said,
nothing of that sort exists. For the much-talked-of
tragedies of Diogenes are now said to be the work
of a certain Philiscus<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Oration</hi> 7. 210 <hi rend='smallcaps'>d</hi>, 212 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a</hi>.</note> of Aegina; though even if
they were by Diogenes there would be nothing out
of the way in a wise man's jesting, since many
philosophers have been known to do so. For
Democritus also, we are told, used to laugh when
he saw men taking things seriously. Well then
I say we must not pay any attention to their
frivolous writings, like men who have no desire at
all to learn anything of serious interest. Such men
when they arrive at a prosperous city abounding in
sacrifices and secret rites of many kinds, and containing
within it countless holy priests who dwell in
the sacred enclosures, priests who for this very
purpose, I mean in order to purify everything that is
within their gates, have expelled all that is sordid
and superfluous and vicious from the city, public
baths and brothels, and retail shops, and everything
of the sort without exception: such men, I say,
having come as far as the quarter where all such
things are, do not enter the city itself. Surely a
man who, when he comes upon the things that have
been expelled, thinks that this is the city, is despicable
indeed if he depart on the instant, but still
more despicable if he stay in that lower region, when
he might by taking but a step across the threshold
behold Socrates himself. For I will borrow those
famous phrases of Alcibiades in his praise of Socrates,<note place='foot'>Plato, <hi rend='italic'>Symposium</hi> 215.</note>
and I assert that the Cynic philosophy is very like
those images of Silenus that sit in the shops of the
statuaries, which the craftsmen make with pipes or
flutes in their hands, but when you open them you
see that inside they contain statues of the gods.
Accordingly, that we may not make that sort of
mistake and think that his jesting was sober earnest
(for though there is a certain use even in those jests,
yet Cynicism itself is something very different, as I
shall presently try to prove), let us consider it in due
course from its actual practice and pursue it like
hounds that track down wild beasts in the chase.)
</p>

<p>
Ἡγεμόνα μὲν οὖν οὐ ῥᾴδιον εὑρεῖν, ἐφ᾽ ὃν
ἀνενέγκαι χρὴ πρῶτον αὐτό, [C] εἰ καί τινες ὑπολαμβάνουσιν
ἀντισθένει τοῦτο καὶ Διογένει
προσήκειν. τοῦτο γοῦν ἔοικεν Οἰνόμαος οὐκ
ἀτόπως λέγειν· ὁ Κυνισμὸς οὔτε Ἀντισθενισμός
ἐστιν οὔτε Διογενισμός. λέγουσι μὲν γὰρ οἱ
γενναιότεροι τῶν κυνῶν, ὅτι καὶ ὁ μέγας Ἡρακλῆς,
ὥσπερ οὖν τῶν ἄλλων ἀγαθῶν ἡμῖν<note place='foot'>Before αἴτιος Cobet omits τις.</note> αἴτιος
κατέστη, οὕτω δὲ καὶ τούτου τοῦ βίου παράδειγμα
τὸ μέγιστον<note place='foot'>Before κατέλιπεν Cobet omits οὗτος.</note> κατέλιπεν ἀνθρώποις. ἐγὼ δὲ
ὑπὲρ τῶν θεῶν καὶ τῶν εἰς θείαν λῆξιν πορευθέντων
εὐφημεῖν ἐθέλων [D] πείθομαι μὲν καὶ πρὸ
τούτου τινὰς οὐκ ἐν Ἕλλησι μόνον, ἀλλὰ καὶ
βαρβάροις οὕτω φιλοσοφῆσαι·<note place='foot'>οὕτω φιλοσοφῆσαι Reiske suggests, lacuna Hertlein, MSS.</note> αὕτη γὰρ ἡ φιλοσοφία
κοινή πως ἔοικεν εἶναι καὶ φυσικωτάτη καὶ
δεῖσθαι οὐδ᾽ ἡστινοσοῦν πραγματείας· ἀλλὰ
ἀπόχρη μόνον ἑλέσθαι τὰ σπουδαῖα ἀρετῆς ἐπιθυμίᾳ
καὶ φυγῇ κακίας, καὶ οὔτε βίβλους ἀνελίξαι
δεῖ μυρίας· πολυμαθία γάρ, φασί, νόον οὐ
διδάσκει· οὔτε ἄλλο τι τῶν τοιούτων παθεῖν, ὅσα
καὶ οἷα πάσχουσιν οἱ διὰ τῶν ἄλλων αἱρέσεων
ἰόντες, [188] ἀλλὰ ἀπόχρη μόνον δύο ταῦτα τοῦ Πυθίου
<pb n='024'/><anchor id='Pg024'/><anchor id='Pg025'/>
παραινοῦντος ἀκοῦσαι, τὸ Γνῶθι σαυτὸν καὶ
Παραχάραξον τὸ νόμισμα· πέφηνεν οὖν ἡμῖν
ἀρχηγὸς τῆς φιλοσοφίας ὅσπερ οἶμαι τοῖς Ἕλλησι
κατέστη τῶν καλῶν ἁπάντων αἴτιος, ὁ τῆς
Ἑλλάδος κοινὸς ἡγεμὼν καὶ νομοθέτης καὶ βασιλεύς,
ὁ ἐν Δελφοῖς θεός, ὃν ἐπειδὴ μὴ θέμις ἦν
τι διαλαθεῖν, οὐδὲ ἡ Διογένους ἐπιτηδειότης ἔλαθε.
προύτρεψε δὲ αὐτὸν οὐχ ὥσπερ τοὺς ἄλλους
ἔπεσιν ἐντείνων τὴν παραίνεσιν, [B] ἀλλ᾽ ἔργῳ
διδάσκων ὅ,τι βούλεται συμβολικῶς διὰ δυοῖν
ὀνομάτοιν, Παραχάραξον εἰπὼν τὸ νόμισμα· τὸ
γάρ Γνῶθι σαυτὸν οὐκ ἐκείνῳ μόνον,<note place='foot'>μόνον Hertlein suggests, πρῶτον MSS.</note> ἀλλὰ καὶ
τοῖς ἄλλοις ἔφη καὶ λέγει, πρόκειται γὰρ οἶμαι
τοῦ τεμένους. ηὑρήκαμεν δὴ τὸν ἀρχηγέτην τῆς
φιλοσοφίας, ὥς που καὶ ὁ δαιμόνιός φησιν Ἰάμβλιχος,
ἀλλὰ καὶ τοὺς κορυφαίους ἐν αὐτῇ,
Ἀντισθένη καὶ Διογένη καὶ Κράτητα, οἷς τοῦ
βίου σκοπὸς ἦν καὶ τέλος αὑτοὺς οἶμαι γνῶναι
καὶ τῶν κενῶν ὑπεριδεῖν δοξῶν, ἀληθείας δέ, ἣ
πάντων μὲν ἀγαθῶν θεοῖς, πάντων δὲ ἀνθρώποις
ἡγεῖται, ὅλῃ, [C] φασίν, ἐπιδράξασθαι τῇ διανοίᾳ,
ἧς οἶμαι καὶ Πλάτων καὶ Πυθαγόρας καὶ Σωκράτης
οἵ τε ἐκ τοῦ Περιπάτου καὶ Ζήνων ἕνεκα
πάντα ὑπέμειναν πόνον, αὑτούς τε ἐθέλοντες
γνῶναι καὶ μὴ κεναῖς ἕπεσθαι δόξαις, ἀλλὰ τὴν
ἐν τοῖς οὖσιν ἀλήθειαν ἀνιχνεῦσαι.
</p>

<p>
(Now the founder of this philosophy to whom we
are to attribute it, in the first instance, is not easy to
discover, even though some think that the title
belongs to Antisthenes and Diogenes. At least the
saying of Oenomaus<note place='foot'>Of Gadara, a Cynic philosopher whose date is probably
the second century <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>; cf. 199 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a</hi>, 209 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b</hi>, 210 <hi rend='smallcaps'>d</hi>, 212 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a</hi>.</note> seems to be not without good
grounds: <q>The Cynic philosophy is neither
Antisthenism nor Diogenism.</q> Moreover the better
sort of Cynics assert that in addition to the other
blessings bestowed on us by mighty Heracles, it was
he who bequeathed to mankind the noblest example
of this mode of life.<note place='foot'>Lucian, <hi rend='italic'>Sale of Creeds</hi> 8, makes Diogenes say that he had
modelled himself on Heracles.</note> But for my part, while I
desire to speak with due reverence of the gods and
of those who have attained to their functions, I still
believe that even before Heracles, not only among
the Greeks but among the barbarians also, there
were men who practised this philosophy. For it seems
to be in some ways a universal philosophy, and the
most natural, and to demand no special study whatsoever.
But it is enough simply to choose the
honourable by desiring virtue and avoiding evil; and
so there is no need to turn over countless books.
For as the saying goes, <q>Much learning does not
teach men to have understanding.</q><note place='foot'>Heracleitus <hi rend='italic'>fr.</hi> 16, Bywater.</note> Nor is it
necessary to subject oneself to any part of such a
discipline as they must undergo who enter other
philosophic sects. Nay it is enough merely to
hearken to the Pythian god when he enjoins these
two precepts, <q>Know Thyself,</q> and <q>Falsify the
common currency.</q><note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Oration</hi> 7. 208 <hi rend='smallcaps'>d</hi>, 211 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b</hi>, 211 <hi rend='smallcaps'>c</hi>.</note> Hence it becomes evident to
us that the founder of this philosophy is he who, I
believe, is the cause of all the blessings that the
Greeks enjoy, the universal leader, law-giver and
king of Hellas, I mean the god of Delphi.<note place='foot'>Apollo.</note> And
since it was not permitted that he should be in
ignorance of aught, the peculiar fitness of Diogenes
did not escape his notice. And he made him incline
to that philosophy, not by urging his commands in
words alone, as he does for other men, but in very
deed he instructed him symbolically as to what he
willed, in two words, when he said, <q>Falsify the
common currency.</q> For <q>Know Thyself</q> he
addressed not only to Diogenes, but to other men
also and still does: for it stands there engraved in
front of his shrine. And so we have at last discovered
the founder of this philosophy, even as the
divine Iamblichus also declares, yes, and we have discovered
its leading men as well, namely Antisthenes
and Diogenes and Crates;<note place='foot'>Of Thebes, the Cynic philosopher, a pupil of Diogenes;
he lived in the latter half of the fourth century <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi></note> the aim and end of
whose lives was, I think, to know themselves, to
despise vain opinions, and to lay hold of truth with
their whole understanding; for truth, alike for gods
and men, is the beginning of every good thing;<note place='foot'>Plato, <hi rend='italic'>Laws</hi> 730 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b</hi>.</note> and
it was, I think, for her sake that Plato and
Pythagoras and Socrates and the Peripatetic
philosophers and Zeno spared no pains, because they
wished to know themselves, and not to follow vain
opinions but to track down truth among all things
that are.)
</p>

<pb n='026'/><anchor id='Pg026'/><anchor id='Pg027'/>

<p>
Φέρε οὖν, ἐπειδὴ πέφηνεν οὐκ ἄλλο μὲν ἐπιτηδεύσας
Πλάτων, ἕτερον δὲ Διογένης, ἓν δέ τι καὶ
ταὐτόν· εἰ γοῦν ἔροιτό τις τὸν σοφὸν Πλάτωνα <q>τὸ
Γνῶθι σαυτὸν πόσου νενόμικας ἄξιον;</q> εὖ οἶδα ὅτι
τοῦ παντὸς ἂν φήσειε, [D] καὶ λέγει δὲ ἐν Ἀλκιβιάδῃ·
δεῦρο δὴ τὸ μετὰ τοῦτο φράσον ἡμῖν, ὦ δαιμόνιε
Πλάτων καὶ θεῶν ἔκγονε <q>Τίνα τρόπον χρὴ
πρὸς τὰς τῶν πολλῶν διακεῖσθαι δόξας,</q> ταὐτά
τε ἐρεῖ καὶ ἔτι πρὸς τούτοις ὅλον ἡμῖν ἐπιτάξει
διαρρήδην ἀναγνῶναι τὸν Κρίτωνα διάλογον, οὗ
φαίνεται παραινῶν Σωκράτης μηδὲν φροντίζειν
ἡμᾶς τῶν τοιούτων· φησὶ γοῦν· <q>Ἀλλὰ τί ἡμῖν,
ὦ μακάριε Κρίτων, [189] οὕτω τῆς τῶν πολλῶν δόξης
μέλει;</q> εἶτα ἡμεῖς τούτων ὑπεριδόντες ἀποτειχίζειν
ἁπλῶς οὑτωσὶ καὶ ἀποσπᾶν ἄνδρας ἀλλήλων
ἐθέλομεν, οὗς ὁ τῆς ἀληθείας συνήγαγεν
ἔρως ἥ τε τῆς δόξης ὑπεροψία καὶ ἡ πρὸς
τὸν ζῆλον τῆς ἀρετῆς ξύμπνοια; εἰ δὲ Πλάτωνι
μὲν ἔδοξε καὶ διὰ τῶν λόγων αὐτὰ ἐργάζεσθαι,
Διογένει δὲ ἀπέχρη τὰ ἔργα, διὰ τοῦτο ἄξιός ἐστιν
ὑφ᾽ ὑμῶν ἀκούειν κακῶς; ὅρα δὲ μὴ καὶ τοῦτο
αὐτὸ τῷ παντὶ κρεῖττόν ἐστιν, ἐπεὶ καὶ Πλάτων
ἐξομνύμενος φαίνεται τὰ ξυγγράμματα. [B] <q>Οὐ γάρ
ἐστι Πλάτωνος,</q> φησί, <q>ζύγγραμμα οὐδὲν οὐδ᾽
ἔσται, τὰ δὲ νῦν φερόμενα ἐστι Σωκράτους, ἀνδρὸς
<pb n='028'/><anchor id='Pg028'/><anchor id='Pg029'/>
καλοῦ καὶ νέου.</q> τί οὖν ἡμεῖς οὐκ ἐκ τῶν ἔργων
τοῦ Διογένους σκοποῦμεν αὐτὸν τὸν Κυνισμόν,
ὅστις ἐστιν;
</p>

<p>
(And now, since it has become evident that
Plato was not pursuing one aim and Diogenes
another, but their end was one and the same:
suppose one should inquire of the wise Plato:
What value do you set on the precept <q>Know
Thyself</q>? I am very sure that he would answer
that it is worth everything, and indeed he says
so in the Alcibiades.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Alcibiades</hi> i. 129 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a</hi>.</note> Come then tell us next,
divine Plato, scion of the gods, how one ought
to be disposed towards the opinions of the many?
He will give the same answer, and moreover he will
expressly enjoin on us to read his dialogue the
Crito,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Crito</hi> 44 <hi rend='smallcaps'>c</hi>.</note> where Socrates is shown warning us not
to take heed of such things. At any rate what
he says is: <q>But why, my dear good Crito, are
we so concerned about the opinion of the multitude?</q>
And now are we to ignore all this evidence, and
without further question fence off from one another
and force apart men whom the passion for truth,
the scorn of opinion, and unanimity in zeal for
virtue have joined together? And if Plato chose
to achieve his aim through words, whereas for
Diogenes deeds sufficed, does the latter on that
account deserve to be criticised by you? Nay,
consider whether that same method of his be
not in every respect superior; since we see that
Plato for himself forswore written compositions.
<q>For</q> he says,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Epistle</hi> 2. 314 <hi rend='smallcaps'>c</hi>; Julian quotes from memory and slightly
alters the original; Plato meant that in his dialogues he had
suppressed his own personality in favour of Socrates.</note> <q>there are no writings by Plato
nor ever will be, and what now pass current as
his are the work of Socrates, the ever fair and
ever young.</q> Why then should we not from
the practice of Diogenes study the character of
the Cynic philosophy?)
</p>

<p>
Οὐκοῦν ἐπειδὴ σώματος μέρη μέν ἐστιν,
οἷον ὀφθαλμοί, πόδες, χεῖρες, ἄλλα δὲ ἐπισυμβαίνει,
τρίχες, ὄνυχες, ῥύπος, τοιούτων περιττωμάτων
γένος, ὧν ὔνευ σῶμα ἀνθρώπινον ἀμήχανον
εἶναι, [C] πότερον οὐ γελοῖός ἐστιν ὁ μέρη
νομίσας ὄνυχας ἢ τρίχας ἢ ῥύπον καὶ τὰ δυσώδη
τῶν περιττωμάτων, ἀλλ᾽ οὐ τὰ τιμιώτατα καὶ
σπουδαῖα, πρῶτον μὲν τὰ αἰσθητήρια καὶ τούτων
αὐτῶν ἅττα συνέσεως ἡμῖν ἐστι μᾶλλον αἴτια,
οἷον ὀφθαλμούς, ἀκοάς; ὑπουργεῖ γὰρ ταῦτα
πρὸς φρόνησιν εἴτε ἐγκατορωρυγμένῃ τῇ ψυχῇ,
ὡς ἂν θᾶττον καθαρθεῖσα δύναιτο τῇ καθαρᾷ
χρῆσθαι<note place='foot'>τῇ καθαρᾷ χρῆσθαι Hertlein suggests, τῇ γε ὡς ἀρχῃ MSS.,
corrupt.</note> καὶ ἀκινήτῳ τοῦ φρονεῖν δυνάμει, εἴτε
ὥσπερ τινὲς οἴονται, καθάπερ δι᾽ ὀχετῶν τοιούτων
εἰσφερούσης τῆς ψυχῆς. [D] συλλέγουσα γάρ, φασί,
τὰ κατὰ μέρος αἰσθήματα καὶ συνέχουσα τῇ
μνήμῃ γεννᾷ τὰς ἐπιστήμας. ἐγὼ δέ, εἰ μή τι
τοιοῦτον ἦν ἐνθέον ἢ τέλειον ἐμποδιζόμενον δὲ<note place='foot'>δὲ Hertlein suggests.</note>
ὑπ᾽ ἄλλων πολλῶν καὶ ποικίλων, ὃ τῶν ἐκτὸς
ποιεῖται τὴν ἀντίληψιν, οὐδ᾽ ἂν δυνατὸν οἶμαι
γενέσθαι τῶν αἰσθητῶν τὴν<note place='foot'>τὴν Naber suggests.</note> ἀντίληψιν. ἀλλ᾽
οὗτος μὲν ὁ λόγος οὐ τοῖς νῦν προσήκει.
</p>

<p>
(Now the body consists of certain parts such
as eyes, feet and hands, but there are besides
other parts, hair, nails, ordure, a whole class of
accessories of that sort without which the human
body cannot exist. Then is it not absurd for a
man to take into account such parts, I mean hair
or nails or ordure or such unpleasant accessories,
rather than those parts that are most precious
and important, in the first place, for instance,
the organs of perception, and among these more
especially the instruments whereby we apprehend,
namely the eyes and ears? For these aid the
soul to think intelligently, whether it be buried
deep in the body and they enable it to purify itself
more readily and to use its pure and steadfast faculty
of thought, or whether, as some think, it is through
them that the soul enters in as though by channels.<note place='foot'>Cf. Lucretius, <hi rend='italic'>De Rerum Natura</hi> 3. 359 foll.; Sextus
Empiricus, <hi rend='italic'>Adversus Mathematicos</hi> 7. 350.</note>
For, as we are told, by collecting individual
perceptions and linking them through the memory
she brings forth the sciences. And for my own
part, I think that if there were not something
of this sort, either incomplete in itself or perfect
but hindered by other things many and various,
which brings about our apprehension of externals,
it would not even be possible for us to apprehend
the objects of sense-perception. But this line of
argument has little to do with the present question.)
</p>

<p>
[190] Διόπερ ἐπανακτέον ἐπὶ τὰ μέρη τῆς φιλοσοφίας
τῆς κυνικῆς. φαίνονται μὲν δὴ καὶ οὗτοι διμερῆ
<pb n='030'/><anchor id='Pg030'/><anchor id='Pg031'/>
τὴν φιλοσοφίαν νομίσαντες ὥσπερ ὁ Ἀριστοτέλης
καὶ Πλάτων, θεωρηματικήν τε καὶ πρακτικὴν,
αὐτὸ τοῦτο<note place='foot'>αὐτὸ τοῦτο Hertlein suggests, αὐτοῦ MSS.</note> συνέντες δηλονότι καὶ νοήσαντες,
ὡς οἰκεῖόν ἐστιν ἔνθρωπος φύσει πράξει καὶ
ἐπιστήμῃ. εἰ δὲ τῆς φυσικῆς τὴν θεωρίαν<note place='foot'>τὴν θεωρίαν Hertlein suggests, πρὸς τὴν θεωρίαν MSS.,
θεωρίας Petavius.</note>
ἐξέκλιναν, οὐδὲν τοῦτο πρὸς τὸν λόγον. ἐπεὶ καὶ
Σωκράτης καὶ πλείονες ἄλλοι θεωρίᾳ μὲν φαίνονται
χρησάμενοι πολλῇ, ταύτῃ δὲ οὐκ ἄλλου
χάριν, ἀλλὰ τῆς πράξεως· ἐπεὶ καὶ τὸ ἑαυτὸν
γνῶναι τοῦτο ἐνόμισαν, [B] τὸ μαθεῖν ἀκριβῶς, τί
μὲν ἐποδοτέον ψυχῇ, τί δὲ σώματι· ἀπέδοσαν δὲ<note place='foot'>δὲ after ἀπέδοσαν Hertlein suggests, τε MSS.</note>
εἰκότως ἡγεμονίαν μὲν τῇ ψυχῇ, ὑπηρεσίαν δὲ τῷ
σώματι. φαίνονται δὴ οὖν ἀρετὴν ἐπιτηδεύσαντες,
ἐγκράτειαν, ἀτυφίαν, ἐλευθερίαν, ἔξω γενόμενοι
παντὸς φθόνου, δειλίας, δεισιδαιμονίας. ἀλλ᾽ οὐχ
ἡμεῖς ταῦτα ὑπὲρ αὐτῶν διανοούμεθα, παίζειν δὲ
αὐτοὺς καὶ κυβεύειν περὶ τοῖς φιλτάτοις ὑπολαμβάνομεν,
οὕτως ὑπεριδόντας [C] τοῦ σώματος,
ὡς ὁ Σωκράτης ἔφη λέγων ὀρθῶς μελέτην εἶναι
θανάτου τὴν φιλοσοφίαν. τοῦτο ἐκεῖνοι καθ᾽
ἑκάστην ἡμέραν ἐπιτηδεύοντες οὐ ζηλωτοὶ μᾶλλον
ἡμῖν, ἄθλιοι δέ τινες καὶ παντελῶς ἀνόητοι
δοκοῦσιν·<note place='foot'>δοκοῦσιν· Hertlein suggests, δοκοῦσιν, MSS.</note> ἀνθ᾽ ὅτου δὲ<note place='foot'>δὲ Hertlein suggests, δὴ MSS.</note> τοὺς πόνους ὑπέμειναν
τούτους;<note place='foot'>τούτους; οὐχ ὡς Hertlein suggests, τούτους, ὡς MSS.</note> οὐχ ὡς αὐτὸς εἶπας, κενοδοξίας ἕνεκα.
καὶ γὰρ<note place='foot'>καὶ γὰρ Hertlein suggests, καίτοι MSS.</note> πῶς ὑπὸ τῶν ἄλλων ἐπῃνοῦντο ὠμὰ
<pb n='032'/><anchor id='Pg032'/><anchor id='Pg033'/>
προσφερόμενοι σαρκία; καίτοι οὐδὲ αὐτὸς ἐπαινέτης
εἶ. [D] τοῦ γοῦν τοιούτου τρίβωνα καὶ τὴν
κόμην, ὥσπερ αἱ γραφαὶ τῶν ἀνδρῶν, ἀπομιμούμενος
εἶθ᾽ ὃ μηδὲ αὐτὸς ἀξιάγαστον ὑπολαμβάνεις,
τοῦτο εὐδοκιμεῖν οἴει παρὰ τῷ πλήθει; καὶ εἳς
μὲν ἢ δεύτερος ἐπῄνει τότε, πλεῖν δ᾽ οὖν ἢ δέκα
μυριάδες ὑπὸ τῆς ναυτίας καὶ βδελυρίας διεστράφησαν
τὸν στόμαχον καὶ ἀπόσιτοι γεγόνασιν,
ἄχρις αὐτοὺς οἱ θεράποντες ἀνέλαβον ὀσμαῖς καὶ
μύροις καὶ πέμμασιν. [191] οὕτως ὁ κλεινὸς ἥρως ἔργῳ
κατεπλήξατο γελοίῳ μὲν ἀνθρώποις τοιούτοις,
</p>

<p>
(Accordingly we must go back to the divisions of
the Cynic philosophy. For the Cynics also seem to
have thought that there were two branches of
philosophy, as did Aristotle and Plato, namely
speculative and practical, evidently because they
had observed and understood that man is by
nature suited both to action and to the pursuit of
knowledge. And though they avoided the study of
natural philosophy, that does not affect the argument.
For Socrates and many others also, as we know,
devoted themselves to speculation, but it was solely
for practical ends. For they thought that even self-knowledge
meant learning precisely what must be
assigned to the soul, and what to the body. And to
the soul they naturally assigned supremacy, and to
the body subjection. This seems to be the reason
why they practised virtue, self-control, modesty and
freedom, and why they shunned all forms of envy,
cowardice and superstition. But this, you will say, is
not the view that we hold about them, for we are to
think that they were not in earnest, and that they
hazarded what is most precious<note place='foot'>Plato, <hi rend='italic'>Protagoras</hi> 314 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a</hi>.</note> in thus despising the
body; as Socrates did when he declared, and rightly,
that philosophy is a preparation for death.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Phaedo</hi> 81 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a</hi>.</note> And
since this was the aim that the Cynics pursued daily,
we need not emulate them any more than the others,
but we are to think them miserable beings and
altogether foolish. But why was it that they
endured those hardships? Surely not from ostentation,
as you declared. For how could they win
applause from other men by eating raw meat?
Certainly you yourself do not applaud them for this.
At any rate, when you imitate one of those Cynics
by carrying a staff and wearing your hair long, as it
is shown in their pictures, do you think that you thereby
gain a reputation with the crowd, though you do
not yourself think those habits worthy of admiration?
One or two, indeed, used to applaud him in his own
day, but more than ten times ten thousand had their
stomachs turned by nausea and loathing, and went
fasting until their attendants revived them with perfumes
and myrrh and cakes. So greatly did that renowned
hero shock them by an act which seems absurd
to men)
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<lg>
<l>Οἷοι νῦν βροτοί εἰσιν,</l>
</lg>

<p>
(<q>of such sort as mortals now are,</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Iliad</hi> 5. 304.</note>)
</p>

</quote>

<p>
οὐκ ἀγεννεῖ δέ, μὰ τοὺς θεούς, εἴ τις αὐτὸ κατὰ
τὴν Διογένους ἐξηγήσαιτο σύνεσιν. ὅπερ γὰρ ὁ
Σωκράτης ὑπὲρ αὑτοῦ φησιν, ὅτι τῷ θεῷ νομίζων
λατρείαν ἐκτελεῖν ἐν τῷ τὸν δοθέντα χρησμὸν
ὑπὲρ αὐτοῦ κατὰ πάντα σκοπῶν ἐξετάζειν τὸν
ἐλεγκτικὸν ἠσπάσατο βίον, τοῦτο καὶ Διογένης
οἶμαι συνειδὼς ἑαυτῷ, πυθόχρηστον οὖσαν τὴν
φιλοσοφίαν, ἔργοις ᾤετο δεῖν ἐξελέγχειν πάντα
καὶ μὴ δόξαις ἄλλων, τυχὸν μὲν ἀληθέσι, τυχὸν
δὲ ψευδέσι προσπεπονθέναι. οὔκουν οὐδὲ εἴ τι
Πυθαγόρας ἔφη, οὐδὲ εἴ τις ἄλλος τῷ Πυθαγόρᾳ
παραπλήσιος, ἀξιόπιστος ἐδόκει τῷ Διογένει.
τὸν γὰρ θεόν, ἀνθρώπων δὲ<note place='foot'>δὲ after ἀνθρώπων Hertlein suggests.</note> οὐδένα τῆς φιλοσοφίας
ἀρχηγὸν ἐπεποίητο. [C] τί δῆτα τοῦτο,
ἐρεῖς, πρὸς τὴν τοῦ πολύποδος ἐδωδήν; ἐγώ σοι
φράσω.
</p>

<p>
(though,
by the gods, it was not ignoble, if one should explain
it according to the intention of Diogenes. For just as
Socrates said of himself that he embraced the life of
cross-examining because he believed that he could
perform his service to the god only by examining in
all its bearings the meaning of the oracle that had
been uttered concerning him, so I think Diogenes
also, because he was convinced that philosophy was
ordained by the Pythian oracle, believed that he
ought to test everything by facts and not be influenced
by the opinions of others, which may be true and
may be false. Accordingly Diogenes did not think
that every statement of Pythagoras, or any man like
Pythagoras, was necessarily true. For he held that
God and no human being is the founder of philosophy.
And pray what, you will say, has this to do with the
eating of octopus? I will tell you.)
</p>

<p>
Τὴν σαρκοφαγίαν οἱ μὲν ἀνθρώποις ὑπολαμβάνουσι
κατὰ φύσιν, οἱ δὲ ἥκιστα τοῦτο ἐργάζεσθαι 
<pb n='034'/><anchor id='Pg034'/><anchor id='Pg035'/>
προσήκειν ἀνθρώπῳ διανοοῦνται, καὶ πολὺς
ὁ περὶ τούτου ἀνάλωται<note place='foot'>ἀνάλωται Hertlein suggests, δείκνυται MSS.</note> λόγος. ἐθέλοντι οὖν
σοι μὴ ῥᾳθυμεῖν ἑσμοὶ περὶ τοῦ τοιούτου βίβλων
φανήσονται. τούτους Διογένης ἐξελέγχειν ᾤετο
δεῖν. διενοήθη γοῦν οὕτως· εἰ μὲν ἀπραγματεύτως
ἐσθίων τις σάρκας, ὥσπερ οἶμαι τῶν
ἄλλων ἕκαστον θηρίων, [D] οἷς τοῦτο ἔνειμεν ἡ φύσις,
ἀβλαβῶς αὐτὸ καὶ ἀνεπαχθῶς, μᾶλλον δὲ καὶ
μετὰ τῆς τοῦ σώματος ὠφελείας ἐργάζοιτο, κατὰ
φύσιν εἶναι πάντως τὴν σαρκοφαγίαν ὑπέλαβεν·
εἰ δέ τις ἐντεῦθεν γένοιτο βλάβη, οὐχὶ τοῦτο
ἀνθρώπου τὸ ἔργον ἴσως ἐνόμισεν, ἀλλ᾽ ἀφεκτέον
εἶναι κατὰ κράτος αὐτοῦ. εἷς μὲν οὖν ἂν εἴη
τοιοῦτος ὑπὲρ τοῦ πράγματος ἴσως βιαιότερος
λόγος, ἕτερος δὲ οἰκειότερος τῷ Κυνισμῷ, εἰ περὶ
τοῦ τέλους αὐτοῦ πρότερον ἔτι σαφέστερον διέλθοιμι.
</p>

<p>
(To eat meat some regard as natural to man, while
others think that to follow this practice is not at all
appropriate for man, and this question has been
much debated. And if you are willing to make the
effort, you can see with your own eyes swarms of
books on the subject. These Diogenes thought it
his duty to refute. At any rate his own view was as
follows. If one can eat meat without taking too
much trouble to prepare it, as can all other animals
to whom nature has assigned this diet, and can do it
without harm or discomfort, or rather with actual
benefit to the body, then he thought that eating
meat is entirely in accordance with nature. But if
harm came of it, then he apparently thought that
the practice is not appropriate for man, and that he
must abstain from it by all means. Here then you
have a theory on this question, though perhaps it is
too far-fetched: but here is another more akin to
Cynicism, only I must first describe more clearly the
end and aim of that philosophy.)
</p>

<p>
[192] Ἀπάθειαν γὰρ ποιοῦνται τὸ τέλος· τοῦτο δὲ
ἴσον ἐστὶ τῷ θεὸν γενέσθαι. αἰσθανόμενος οὖν
ἴσως αὑτοῦ Διογένης ἐν μὲν τοῖς ἄλλοις ἅπασιν
ἀπαθοῦς, ὑπὸ δὲ τῆς τοιαύτης ἐδωδῆς μόνον θραττομένου
καὶ ναυτιῶντος καὶ δόξῃ κενῇ μᾶλλον<note place='foot'>μᾶλλον Hertlein suggests, μόνον MSS.</note>
ἢ λόγῳ δεδουλωμένου· σάρκες γάρ εἴσιν οὐδὲν
ἧττον, κἂν μυριάκις αὐτὰς ἑψήσῃ, κἂν ὑποτρίμμασι
μυρίοις τις αὐτὰς καρυκεύσῃ· καὶ ταύτης
αὑτὸν ἀφελέσθαι καὶ καταστῆσαι παντάπασιν
ἐξάντη τῆς δειλίας ᾠήθη χρῆναι. [B] δειλία γάρ ἐστιν,
εὖ ἴσθι, τὸ γοῦν τοιοῦτον. ἐπεὶ πρὸς τῆς Θεσμοφόρου
εἰ σαρκῶν ἡψημένων ἁπτόμεθα, τοῦ χάριν
<pb n='036'/><anchor id='Pg036'/><anchor id='Pg037'/>
οὐχὶ καὶ ἁπλῶς αὐτὰς προσφερόμεθα, φράσον
ἡμῖν. οὐ γὰρ ἔχεις ἕτερον εἰπεῖν ἢ ὅτι οὕτω νενόμισται
καὶ οὕτω συνειθίσμεθα. οὐ γὰρ δὴ πρὶν μὲν
ἑψηθῆναι βδελυρὰ πέφυκεν, ἑψηθέντα δὲ γέγονεν
αὑτῶν ἁγνότερα. [C] τί δῆτα ἐχρῆν πράττειν τόν γε
παρὰ θεοῦ ταχθέντα καθάπερ στρατηγοῦ πᾶν μὲν
ἐξελεῖν τὸ νόμισμα, λόγῳ δὲ καὶ ἀληθείᾳ κρῖναι
τὰ πράγματα; περιιδεῖν αὑτὸν ὑπὸ ταύτης τῆς
δόξης ἐνοχλούμενον, ὡς νομίζειν ὅτι κρέας μέν
ἐστιν ἑψηθὲν ἁγνὸν καὶ ἐδώδιμον, μὴ κατεργασθὲν
δὲ ὑπὸ τοῦ πυρὸς μυσαρόν πως<note place='foot'>πως Hertlein suggests, ἴσως MSS.</note> καὶ βδελυρόν;
οὕτως εἶ μνήμων; οὕτως εἶ σπουδαῖος; ὃς τοσοῦτον
ὀνειδίζων τῷ κενοδόξῳ, κατὰ σὲ φάναι, [D] Διογένει,
κατ᾽ ἐμὲ δὲ τῷ σπουδαιοτάτῳ θεράποντι καὶ
ὑπηρέτῃ τοῦ Πυθίου, τὴν τοῦ πολύποδος ἐδωδὴν
κατεδήδοκας μυρίους ταρίχους.
</p>

<p>
(Freedom from emotion they regard as the end
and aim; and this is equivalent to becoming a god.
Now perhaps Diogenes observed that in the case of
all other foods he himself had no particular sensations,
and that only raw meat gave him indigestion
and nausea, and took this for a proof that he was
enslaved to vain opinion rather than reason; for
flesh is none the less flesh, even though you cook it
any number of times or season it with any number
of sauces. This, I say, was why he thought he ought
to rid and free himself altogether of this cowardice;
for you may be sure that this sort of thing is
cowardice. And in the name of the Law-Giving
goddess,<note place='foot'>Demeter, who regulated the customs of civilised life,
especially agriculture: her festival was the Thesmophoria.</note> tell me why if we used cooked meats we do
not eat them in their natural state also? You can
give me no other answer than that this has become a
custom and a habit with us. For surely we cannot
say that before meat is cooked it is disgusting and
that by being cooked it becomes purer than it was
by nature. What then was it right for him to do
who had been appointed by God like a general in
command to do away with the common currency and
to judge all questions by the criterion of reason and
truth? Ought he to have shut his eyes and been so
far fettered by this general opinion as to believe that
flesh by being cooked becomes pure and fit for food,
but that when it has not been acted upon by fire
it is somehow abominable and loathsome? Is this
the sort of memory you have? Is this your zeal
for truth? For though you so severely criticised
Diogenes the vain-glorious, as you call him&mdash;though
I call him the most zealous servant and vassal of the
Pythian god&mdash;for eating octopus, you yourself have
devoured endless pickled food,)</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<lg>
<l>Ἰχθῦς ὄρνιθάς τε φίλας θ᾽ ὅτι χεῖρας ἵκοιτο,</l>
</lg>

<p>
(<q>Fish and birds and
whatever else might come to hand.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Odyssey</hi> 12. 331.</note>)
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Αἰγύπτιός γε ὤν, οὐ τῶν ἱερέων, ἀλλὰ τῶν παμφάγων,
οἷς πάντα ἐσθίειν νόμος ὡς λάχανα χόρτου·
γνωρίζεις οἶμαι [193] τῶν Γαλιλαίων τὰ ῥήματα.
μικροῦ με παρῆλθεν εἰπεῖν, ὅτι καὶ πάντες ἄνθρωποι
πλησίον οἰκοῦντες θαλάττης, ἤδη δέ τινες
καὶ τῶν πόρρω, οὐδὲ θερμήναντες καταρροφοῦσιν
ἐχίνους, ὄστρεα καὶ πάντα ἁπλῶς τὰ τοιαῦτα·
εἶτα ἐκείνους μὲν ὑπολαμβάνεις ζηλωτούς, ἄθλιον
δὲ καὶ βδελυρὸν ἡλῇ Διογένη, καὶ οὐκ ἐννοεῖς, ὡς
οὐδὲν μᾶλλον ταῦτα ἐκείνων ἐστὶ σαρκία· πλὴν
<pb n='038'/><anchor id='Pg038'/><anchor id='Pg039'/>
ἴσως ταῦτα ἐκείνων διαφέρει τῷ τὰ μὲν εἶναι
μαλθακά, τὰ δὲ σκληρότερα. ἄναιμος γοῦν
ἐστι καὶ πολύπους [B] ὥσπερ ἐκεῖνα, ἔμψυχα δέ
ἐστι καὶ τὰ ὀστρακόδερμα καθάπερ καὶ οὗτος·
ἥδεται γοῦν καὶ λυπεῖται, ὃ τῶν ἐμψύχων
μάλιστά ἐστιν ἴδιον. ἐνοχλείτω δὲ μηδὲν ἡμᾶς ἡ
Πλατωνικὴ τανῦν δόξα ἔμψυχα ὑπολαμβάνουσα
καὶ τὰ φυτά. ἀλλ᾽ ὅτι μὲν οὔτι ἄλογον<note place='foot'>οὔτι ἄλογον Hertlein suggests, οὐ χαλεπὸν MSS.</note> οὐδὲ
παράνομον οὐδὲ ἀσύνηθες ὑμῖν ὁ γενναῖος εἰργάσατο
Διογένης, εἰ μὴ τῷ σκληροτέρῳ καὶ μαλακωτέρῳ,
ἡδονῇ τε λαιμοῦ καὶ ἀηδίᾳ τὰ τοιαῦτά
τις ἐξετάζοι, πρόδηλον οἶμαι τοῖς ὁπωσοῦν ἕπεσθαι
λόγῳ δυναμένοις. οὐκ ἄρα τὴν ὠμοφαγίαν
βδελύττεσθε οἱ τὰ παραπλήσια δρῶντες, [C] οὐκ ἐπὶ
τῶν ἀναίμων μόνον ζῴων, ἀλλὰ καὶ ἐπὶ τῶν αἷμα
ἐχόντων. καὶ τούτῳ δὲ ἴσως διαφέρεσθε πρὸς
ἐκεῖνον, ὅτι ὁ μὲν ἁπλῶς ταῦτα καὶ κατὰ φύσιν
ᾠήθη χρῆναι προσφέρεσθαι, ἁλσὶ δὲ ὑμεῖς καὶ
πολλοῖς ἄλλοις ἀρτύσαντες ἡδονῆς ἕνεκα, τὴν φύσιν
ὅπως βιάσησθε. καὶ δὴ τοῦτο μὲν ἐπὶ τοσοῦτον
ἀπόχρη.
</p>

<p>
(For you
are an Egyptian, though not of the priestly caste,
but of the omnivorous type whose habit it is to eat
everything <q>even as the green herb.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Genesis</hi> 9. 3.</note> You recognise,
I suppose, the words of the Galilaeans. I
almost omitted to say that all men who live near the
sea, and even some who live at a distance from it,
swallow down sea-urchins, oysters and in general
everything of the kind without even heating them.
And then you think they are enviable, whereas you
regard Diogenes as contemptible and disgusting, and
you do not perceive that those shell-fish are flesh
just as much as what he ate? Except perhaps that
differ in so far as the octopus is soft and shell-fish
are harder. At any rate the octopus is bloodless,
like hard-shelled fish, but the latter too are animate
things like the octopus. At least they feel pleasure
and pain, which is the peculiar characteristic of
animate things. And here we must not be put out
by Plato's theory<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Timaeus</hi> 77 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b</hi>.</note> that plants also are animated by
soul. But it is now, I think, evident to those who
are in any way able to follow an argument, that what
the excellent Diogenes did was not out of the way
or irregular or contrary to our habits, that is if we do
not in such cases apply the criterion of hardness and
softness, but judge rather by the pleasure or distaste
of the palate. And so it is not after all the eating
of raw food that disgusts you, since you do the like,
not only in the case of bloodless animals but also
of those that have blood. But perhaps there is also
this difference between you and Diogenes, that he
thought he ought to eat such food just as it was and
in the natural state, whereas you think you must
first prepare it with salt and many other things
to make it agreeable and so do violence to nature.
I have now said enough on this subject.)
</p>

<p>
[D] Τῆς Κυνικῆς δὲ φιλοσοφίας σκοπὸς μέν ἐστι
καὶ τέλος, ὥσπερ δὴ καὶ πάσης φιλοσοφίας, τὸ
εὐδαιμονεῖν, τὸ δὲ εὐδαιμονεῖν ἐν τῷ ζῆν κατὰ
φύσιν, ἀλλὰ μὴ πρὸς τὰς τῶν πολλῶν δόξας. ἐπεὶ
καὶ τοῖς φυτοῖς εὖ πράττειν συμβαίνει καὶ μέντοι
καὶ ζῴοις πᾶσιν, ὅταν τοῦ κατὰ φύσιν ἕκαστον
ἀνεμποδίστως τυγχάνῃ τέλους· ἀλλὰ καὶ ἐν τοῖς
θεοῖς τοῦτό ἐστιν εὐδαιμονίας ὅρος, τὸ ἔχειν
αὐτοὺς ὥσπερ πεφύκασι καὶ ἑαυτῶν εἶναι. [194] οὐκοῦν
<pb n='040'/><anchor id='Pg040'/><anchor id='Pg041'/>
καὶ τοῖς ἀνθρώποις οὐχ ἑτέρωθί που τὴν εὐδαιμονίαν
ἀποκεκρυμμένην προσήκει πολυπραγμονεῖν·
οὐδὲ ἀετὸς οὐδὲ πλάτανος οὐδὲ ἄλλο τι τῶν ὄντων
ζῴων ἢ φυτῶν χρυσᾶ περιεργάζεται πτερὰ καὶ
φύλλα, οὐδὲ ὅπως ἀργυροῦς ἕξει τοὺς βλαστοὺς
ἢ τὰ πλῆκτρα καὶ κέντρα σιδηρᾶ, μᾶλλον δὲ
ἀδαμάντινα, ἀλλ᾽ οἷς αὐτὰ ἐξ ἀρχῆς ἡ φύσις
ἐκόσμησε, ταῦτα εἰ ῥωμαλέα καὶ πρὸς τάχος αὐτοῖς
ἢ πρὸς ἀλκὴν ὑπουργοῦντα προσγένοιτο,
μάλιστα ἂν εὖ πράττειν [B] νομίζοι καὶ εὐθηνεῖσθαι.
πῶς οὖν οὐ γελοῖον, εἴ τις ἄνθρωπος γεγονὼς ἔξω
που τὴν εὐδαιμονίαν περιεργάσαιτο, πλοῦτον καὶ
γένος καὶ φίλων δύναμιν καὶ πάντα ἁπλῶς τὰ
τοιαῦτα τοῦ παντὸς ἄξια νομίζων; εἰ μὲν οὖν
ἡμῖν ἡ φύσις ὥσπερ τοῖς ζῴοις αὐτὸ τοῦτο
ἀπέδωκε μόνον, τὸ σώματα καὶ ψυχὰς ἔχειν
ἐκείνοις παραπλησίας, ὥστε μηδὲν πλέον πολυπραγμονεῖν,
ἤρκει λοιπόν, [C] ὥσπερ τὰ λοιπὰ ζῷα,
τοῖς σωματικοῖς ἀρκεῖσθαι πλεονεκτήμασιν, ἐνταῦθά
που τὸ εὐδαιμονεῖν πολυπραγμονοῦσιν.
ἐπεὶ δὲ ἡμῖν οὐδέν τι παραπλησία ψυχὴ τοῖς ἄλλοις
ἐνέσπαρται ζῴοις, ἀλλ᾽ εἴτε κατ᾽ οὐσίαν διαφέρουσα
εἴτε οὐσίᾳ μὲν ἀδιάφορος, ἐνεργείᾳ δὲ
μόνῃ κρείττων, ὥσπερ οἶμαι τὸ καθαρὸν ἤδη
χρυσίον τοῦ συμπεφυρμένου τῇ ψάμμῳ· λέγεται
γὰρ καὶ οὗτος ὁ λόγος περὶ τῆς ψυχῆς ὡς ἀληθὴς
ὑπό τινων· [D] ἡμεῖς δὴ οὖν ἐπειδὴ σύνισμεν αὑτοῖς
οὖσι τῶν ζῴων ξυνετωτέροις· κατὰ γὰρ τὸν Πρωταγόρου
μῦθον ἐκείνοις μὲν ἡ φύσις ὥσπερ μήτηρ
<pb n='042'/><anchor id='Pg042'/><anchor id='Pg043'/>
ἄγαν φιλοτίμως καὶ μεγαλοδώρως προσηνέχθη,
ἡμῖν δὲ ἀντὶ πάντων ἐκ Διὸς ὁ νοῦς ἐδόθη· τὴν
εὐδαιμονίαν ἐνταῦθα θετέον, ἐν τῷ κρατίστῳ καὶ
σπουδαιοτάτῳ τῶν ἐν ἡμῖν.
</p>

<p>
(Now the end and aim of the Cynic philosophy,
as indeed of every philosophy, is happiness, but
happiness that consists in living according to
nature and not according to the opinions of the
multitude. For plants too are considered to do well,
and indeed all animals also, when without hindrance
each attains the end designed for it by nature. Nay,
even among the gods this is the definition of happiness,
that their state should be according to their
nature, and that they should be independent. And
so too in the case of human beings we must not be
busy about happiness as if it were hidden away outside
ourselves. Neither the eagle nor the plane tree
nor anything else that has life, whether plant or
animal, vainly troubles itself about wings or leaves of
gold or that its shoots may be of silver or its stings
and spurs of iron, or rather of adamant; but where
nature in the beginning has adorned them with such
things, they consider that, if only they are strong and
serviceable for speed or defence, they themselves are
fortunate and well provided. Then is it not absurd
when a human being tries to find happiness somewhere
outside himself, and thinks that wealth and birth
and the influence of friends, and generally speaking
everything of that sort is of the utmost importance?
If however nature had bestowed on us only what
she has bestowed on other animals, I mean the
possession of bodies and souls like theirs, so that we
need concern ourselves with nothing beyond, then it
would suffice for us, as for all other animals, to content
ourselves with physical advantages, and to pursue
happiness within this field. But in us has been
implanted a soul that in no way resembles other
animals; and whether it be different in essence, or
not different in essence but superior in its activity
only, just as, I suppose, pure gold is superior
to gold alloyed with sand,&mdash;for some people hold
this theory to be true of the soul,&mdash;at any rate
we surely know that we are more intelligent
than other animals. For according to the myth in
the Protagoras,<note place='foot'>Plato, <hi rend='italic'>Protagoras</hi> 321 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a</hi>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>b</hi>; Plato however says that the
theft of fire by Prometheus saved mankind, and that later
Zeus bestowed on them the political art.</note> nature dealt with them very generously
and bountifully, like a mother, but to compensate
for all this, mind was bestowed on us by
Zeus. Therefore in our minds, in the best and
noblest part of us, we must say that happiness
resides.)
</p>

<p>
Σκόπει δή, ταύτης εἰ μὴ μάλιστα τῆς προαιρέσεως
ἦν Διογένης, ὃς τὸ μὲν σῶμα τοῖς πόνοις
ἀνέδην παρεῖχεν, ἵνα αὐτὸ τῆς φύσεως ῥωμαλεώτερον
καταστήσῃ πράττειν [195] δὲ ἠξίου μόνον ὁπόσα
ἂν φανῇ τῷ λόγῳ πρακτέα, τοὺς δὲ ἐκ τοῦ
σώματος ἐμπίπτοντας τῇ ψυχῇ θορύβους, οἷα
πολλάκις ἡμᾶς ἀναγκάζει τουτὶ τὸ περικείμενον
αὐτοῦ χάριν πολυπραγμονεῖν, οὐδὲ ἐν μέρει
προσίετο. ὑπὸ δὲ ταύτης τῆς ἀσκήσεως ὁ ἀνὴρ
οὕτω μὲν ἔσχεν ἀνδρεῖον τὸ σῶμα ὡς οὐδεὶς οἶμαι
τῶν τοὺς [B] στεφανίτας ἀγωνισαμένων, οὕτω δὲ διετέθη
τὴν ψυχήν, ὥστε εὐδαιμονεῖν, ὥστε βασιλεύειν
οὐδὲν ἔλαττον, εἰ μὴ καὶ πλέον, ὡς οἱ τότε
εἰώθεσαν λέγειν Ἕλληνες, τοῦ μεγάλου βασιλέως,
τὸν Πέρσην λέγοντες. ἆρά σοι μικρὰ φαίνεται
ἀνὴρ
</p>

<p>
(Now consider whether Diogenes did not above all
other men profess this belief, since he freely exposed
his body to hardships so that he might make it
stronger than it was by nature. He allowed himself
to act only as the light of reason shows us that we
ought to act; and the perturbations that attack the
soul and are derived from the body, to which this
envelope of ours often constrains us for its sake to
pay too much attention, he did not take into account
at all. Thus by means of this discipline the man
made his body more vigorous, I believe, than that of
any who have contended for the prize of a crown in
the games: and his soul was so disposed that he was
happy and a king no less if not even more than the
Great King, as the Greeks used to call him in those
days, by which they meant the king of Persia. Then
does he seem to you of no importance, this man who
was)
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<lg>
<l>Ἄπολις, ἄοικος, πατρίδος ἐστερημένος,</l>
<l>οὐκ ὀβολόν, οὐ δραχμήν, ἔχων<note place='foot'>ἔχων οὐδ᾽ οἰκέτην Kaibel, οὐκ οἰκέτην ἔχων Hertlein, MSS.;
Hertlein prints the second verse as prose.</note> οὐδ᾽ οἰκέτην,</l>
</lg>

<p>
(<q>cityless, homeless, a man without a country,
owning not an obol, not a drachma, not a single
slave,</q><note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Letter to Themistius</hi> 256 <hi rend='smallcaps'>d</hi>; Nauck, <hi rend='italic'>Adespota
Fragmenta</hi> 6; Diogenes Laertius, 6. 38, says that this was a
favourite quotation of Diogenes; its source is unknown.</note>)
</p>

</quote>

<p>
ἀλλ᾽ οὐδὲ μᾶζαν, ἧς Ἐπίκουρος εὐπορῶν οὐδὲ τῶν
θεῶν φησιν εἰς εὐδαιμονίας λόγον ἐλαττοῦσθαι,
πρὸς μὲν τοὺς θεοὺς οὐκ ἐρίζων, [C] τοῦ δοκοῦντος δὲ
τοῖς ἀνθρώποις εὐδαιμονεστάτου εὐδαιμονέστερον
ζῶν καὶ ἔλεγε ζῆν εὐδαιμονέστερον. εἰ δὲ ἀπιστεῖς,
<pb n='044'/><anchor id='Pg044'/><anchor id='Pg045'/>
ἔργῳ πειραθεὶς ἐκείνου τοῦ βίου καὶ οὐ τῷ λόγῳ
αἰσθήσῃ.
</p>

<p>
(nay, not even a loaf of bread&mdash;and Epicurus
says that if he have bread enough and to spare he is
not inferior to the gods on the score of happiness.
Not that Diogenes tried to rival the gods, but he
lived more happily than one who is counted the
happiest of men, and he used actually to assert that
he lived more happily than such a man. And if you
do not believe me, try his mode of life in deed and
not in word, and you will perceive the truth.)
</p>

<p>
Φέρε δὴ πρῶτον αὐτὸν διὰ τῶν λόγων ἐλέγξωμεν.
ἆρά σοι δοκεῖ τῶν πάντων ἀγαθῶν ἀνθρώποις
ἡγεῖσθαι, τούτων δὴ τῶν πολυθρυλήτων,
ἐλευθερίαν· [D] πῶς γὰρ οὐ φήσεις· ἐπεὶ καὶ τὰ
χρήματα καὶ πλοῦτος καὶ γένος καὶ σώματος
ἰσχὺς καὶ κάλλος καὶ πάντα ἁπλῶς τὰ τοιαῦτα
δίχα τῆς ἐλευθερίας οὐ τοῦ δοκοῦντος ηὐτυχηκέναι,
τοῦ κτησαμένου δὲ αὐτόν ἐστιν ἀγαθά; τίνα οὖν
ὑπολαμβάνομεν τὸν δοῦλον; ἇρα μή ποτε ἐκεῖνον,
ὃν ἂν πριώμεθα δραχμῶν ἀργυρίου τόσων ἢ μναῖν
δυοῖν ἢ χρυσίου στατήρων δέκα; ἐρεῖς δήπουθεν
τοῦτον εἶναι ἀληθῶς δοῦλον. ἆρα δι᾽ αὐτὸ τοῦτο,
ὅτι τὸ ἀργύριον ὑπὲρ αὐτοῦ τῷ πωλοῦντι καταβεβλήκαμεν;
οὕτω μεντἂν [196] εἶεν οἰκέται καὶ ὁπέσους
τῶν αἰχμαλώτων λυτρούμεθα. καίτοι καὶ
οἱ νόμοι τούτοις ἀποδεδώκασι τὴν ἐλευθερίαν
σωθεῖσιν οἴκαδε, καὶ ἡμεῖς αὐτοὺς ἀπολυτρούμεθα,
οὐχ ἵνα δουλεύσωσιν, ἀλλ᾽ ἵνα ὦσιν ἐλεύθεροι.
ὁρᾷς ὡς οὐχ ἱκανόν ἐστιν ἀργύριον καταβαλεῖν ἐς
τὸ ἀποφῆναι τὸν λυτρωθέντα δοῦλον, ἀλλ᾽ ἐκεῖνός
ἐστιν ὡς ἀληθῶς δοῦλος, οὗ κύριός ἐστιν ἕτερος
προσαναγκάσαι πράττειν ὅ,τι ἂν κελεύῃ, καὶ μὴ
βουλόμενον κόλασαι καί, τὸ λεγόμενον ὑπὸ τοῦ
ποιητοῦ,
</p>

<p>
(Come, let us first test it by reasoning. You think,
do you not, that for mankind freedom is the beginning
of all good things,<note place='foot'>Cf. 188 <hi rend='smallcaps'>c</hi>, Plato, <hi rend='italic'>Laws</hi> 730 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b</hi>.</note> I mean of course what people are
always calling good? How can you deny it? For
property, money, birth, physical strength, beauty and
in a word everything of the sort when divorced from
freedom are surely blessings that belong, not to him
who merely seems to enjoy them, but to him who is
that man's master? Whom then are we to regard as a
slave? Shall it be him whom we buy for so many silver
drachmas, for two minae or for ten staters<note place='foot'>The stater or Daric was worth about a sovereign.</note> of gold?
Probably you will say that such a man is truly a
slave. And why? Is it because we have paid down
money for him to the seller? But in that case the
prisoners of war whom we ransom would be slaves.
And yet the law on the one hand grants these their
freedom when they have come safe home, and we on
the other hand ransom them not that they may
become slaves, but that they may be free. Do you
see then that in order to make a ransomed man a
slave it is not enough to pay down a sum of money,
but that man is truly a slave over whom another man
has power to compel him to do whatever he orders,
and if he refuse, to punish him and in the words of
the poet)
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<lg>
<l>κακαῖς ὀδύνῃσι πελάζειν;</l>
</lg>

<p>
(<q>to inflict grievous pains upon him</q>?<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Iliad</hi> 5. 766.</note>)
</p>

</quote>

<p>
ὅρα δὴ τὸ μετὰ τοῦτο, [B] εἰ μὴ κύριοι πάντες ἡμῶν
εἰσιν, οὓς ἀναγκαῖον ἡμῖν θεραπεύειν, ἵνα μηδὲν
ἀλγῶμεν μηδὲ λυπώμεθα κολαζόμενοι παρ᾽ αὐτῶν.
<pb n='046'/><anchor id='Pg046'/><anchor id='Pg047'/>
ἢ τοῦτο οἴει κόλασιν μόνον, εἴ τις ἐπανατεινόμενος
τὴν βακτηρίαν καθίκοιτο τοῦ οἰκέτου; καίτοι γε
τοιοῦτον οὐδὲ οἱ τραχύτατοι τῶν δεσποτῶν ἐπὶ
πάντων ποιοῦσι τῶν οἰκετῶν, ἀλλὰ καὶ λόγος
ἀρκεῖ πολλάκις καὶ ἀπειλή. [C] μήποτε οὖν, ὦ φίλε,
νομίσῃς εἶναι ἐλεύθερος, ἄχρις οὗ γαστὴρ ἄρχει
σου καὶ τὰ ἔνερθεν γαστρὸς οἵ τε τοῦ παρασχεῖν
τὰ πρὸς ἡδονὴν καὶ ταῦτὰ<note place='foot'>ταῦτὰ
Hertlein suggests, ταῦτα MSS.</note> ἀποκωλῦσαι κύριοι,
καὶ εἰ τούυτων δὲ γένοιο κρείττων, ἕως ἂν δουλεύῃς
ταῖς τῶν πολλῶν δόξαις, οὔπω τῆς ἐλευθερίας
ἔθιγες οὐδὲ ἐγεύσω τοῦ νέκταρος,
</p>

<p>
(Then
consider next whether we have not as many masters
as there are persons whom we are obliged to conciliate
in order not to suffer pain or annoyance from
being punished by them? Or do you think that the
only sort of punishment is when a man lifts up his
stick against a slave and strikes him? Yet not even
the harshest masters do this in the case of all their
slaves, but a word or a threat is often enough. Then
never think, my friend, that you are free while your
belly rules you and the part below the belly, since
you will then have masters who can either furnish
you the means of pleasure or deprive you of them;
and even though you should prove yourself superior
to these, so long as you are a slave to the opinions of
the many you have not yet approached freedom or
tasted its nectar,)
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<lg>
<l>Οὐ μὰ τὸν ἐν στέρνοισιν ἐμοῖς παραδόντα
τετρακτύν.</l>
</lg>

<p>
(<q>I swear by him who set in my
breast the mystery of the Four!</q><note place='foot'>An oath used by the Pythagoreans, who regarded the
tetrad, the sum of the first four numbers, as symbolical
of all proportion and perfection; cf. Aetios, <hi rend='italic'>Placita</hi> 1. 7.
Pythagoras, <hi rend='italic'>Aureum Carmen</hi> 47, Mullach νὰ μὰ τὸν ἁμετέρᾳ
ψυχᾷ παραδόντα τετρακτύν.</note>)
</p>

</quote>

<p>
καὶ οὐ τοῦτό φημι, [D] ὡς ἀπερυθριᾶσαι χρὴ πρὸς
πάντας καὶ πράττειν. τὰ μὴ πρακτέα· ἀλλ᾽ ὧν
ἀπεχόμεθα καὶ ὅσα πράττομεν, μὴ διὰ τὸ τοῖς
πολλοῖς δοκεῖν σπουδαῖα πως<note place='foot'>πως Hertlein suggests, πάντως MSS.</note> ἢ φαῦλα, διὰ
τοῦτο πράττωμεν καὶ ἀπεχώμεθα, ἀλλ᾽ ὅτι τῷ
λόγῳ καὶ τῷ ἐν ἡμῖν θεῷ, τοῦτ᾽ ἐστὶ τῷ νῷ, ταῦτά
ἐστιν ἀπόρρητα. τοὺς μὲν οὖν πολλοὺς οὐδὲν κωλύει
ταῖς κοιναῖς ἕπεσθαι δόξαις· ἄμεινον γὰρ τοῦτο
τοῦ παντάπασιν ἀπερυθριᾶν· [197] ἔχουσι γὰρ ἅνθρωποι
φύσει πρὸς ἀλήθειαν οἰκείως· ἀνδρὶ δὲ ἤδη
κατὰ νοῦν ζῶντι καὶ τοὺς ὀρθοὺς εὑρεῖν τε δυναμένῳ
καὶ κρῖναι λόγους προσήκει τὸ παράπαν
οὐδὲν ἕπεσθαι τοῖς νομιζομένοις ὑπὸ τῶν πολλῶν
εὗ τε καὶ χεῖρον πράττεσθαι.
</p>

<p>
(But I do not
mean by this that we ought to be shameless before
all men and to do what we ought not; but all that
we refrain from and all that we do let us not do or
refrain from, merely because it seems to the multitude
somehow honourable or base, but because it is forbidden
by reason and the god within us, that is, the
mind.<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Oration</hi> 268 <hi rend='smallcaps'>d</hi>; Euripides <hi rend='italic'>fr.</hi> 1007 Nauck ὁ νοῦς γὰρ
ἡμῶν ἐστιν ἐν ἑκάστῳ θεός; Iamblichus, <hi rend='italic'>Protrepticus</hi> 8. 138.</note> As for the multitude there is no reason why
they should not follow common opinions, for that is
better than that they should be altogether shameless,
and indeed mankind is predisposed to the truth by
nature. But a man who has attained to a life in
accordance with intelligence and is able to discover
and estimate right reasons, ought on no account
whatever to follow the views held by the many about
good and bad conduct.)
</p>

<pb n='048'/><anchor id='Pg048'/><anchor id='Pg049'/>

<p>
Οὐκοῦν ἐπειδὴ τὸ μέν ἐστι τῆς ψυχῆς ἡμῶν
θειότερον, ὃ δὴ νοῦν καὶ φρόνησίν φαμεν καὶ
λόγον τὸν σιγώμενον, οὗ κήρυξ ἐστὶν ὁ διὰ τῆς
φωνῆς οὑτοσὶ λόγος προïὼν ἐξ ὀνομάτων καὶ
ῥημάτων, ἕτερον δέ τι τούτῳ συνέζευκται ποικίλον
καὶ παντοδαπόν, [B] ὀργῇ καὶ ἐπιθυμίᾳ ξυμμιγές τι
καὶ πολυκέφαλον θηρίον, οὐ πρότερον χρὴ πρὸς
τὰς δόξας τῶν πολλῶν ἀτενῶς ὁρᾶν καὶ ἀδιατρέπτως,
πρὶν ἂν τοῦτο δαμάσωμεν τὸ θηρίον καὶ
πείσωμεν ὑπακοῦσαι τῷ παρ᾽ ἡμῖν θεῷ, μᾶλλον δὲ
θείῳ. τοῦτο γὰρ πολλοὶ τοῦ Διογένους ζηλωταὶ
ἐάσαντες<note place='foot'>ζηλωταὶ ἐάσαντες Hertlein suggests, ζηλώσαντες MSS.</note> ἐγένοντο παντορέκται καὶ μιαροὶ καὶ
τῶν θηρίων οὐδὲ ἑνὸς κρείττους, ὅτι δὲ οὐκ ἐμὸς ὁ
λόγος ἐστί, [C] πρῶτον ἔργον ἐρῶ σοι Διογένους, ἐφ᾽
ᾧ γελάσονται μὲν οἱ πολλοί, ἐμοὶ δὲ εἶναι δοκεῖ
σεμνότατον. ἐπειδὴ γάρ τις τῶν νέων ἐν ὄχλῳ,
παρόντος καὶ τοῦ Διογόνους, ἀπέπαρδεν, ἐπάταξεν
ἐκεῖνος τῇ βακτηρίᾳ φάς· εἶτα, ὦ κάθαρμα, μηδὲν
ἄξιον τοῦ δημοσίᾳ τὰ τοιταῦτα θαρσεῖν πράξας
ἐντεῦθεν ἡμῖν ἄρχῃ δόξης καταφρονεῖν; οὕτως
ᾤετο χρῆναι πρότερον ἡδονῆς καὶ θυμοῦ κρείττονα
γενέσθαι, πρὶν<note place='foot'>πρὶν Hertlein suggests, καὶ τρίτον MSS.</note> ἐπὶ τὸ τελειότατον ἐλθεῖν τῶν
παλαισμάτων, [D] ἀποδυσάμενον πρὸς τὰς τῶν
πολλῶν δόξας αἳ μυρίων κακῶν αἴτιαι γίνονται
τοῖς πολλοῖς.
</p>

<p>
(Since therefore one part of our souls is more
divine, which we call mind and intelligence and
silent reason, whose herald is this speech of ours
made up of words and phrases and uttered through
the voice; and since there is yoked therewith
another part of the soul which is changeful and
multiform, something composite of anger and appetite,
a many-headed monster, we ought not to look
steadily and unswervingly at the opinions of the
multitude until we have tamed this wild beast and
persuaded it to obey the god within us, or rather
the divine part. For this it is that many disciples
of Diogenes have ignored, and hence have become
rapacious and depraved and no better than any
one of the brute beasts. And to prove that this is
not my own theory,<note place='foot'>Euripides <hi rend='italic'>fr.</hi> 488; <hi rend='italic'>Misopogon</hi> 358 <hi rend='smallcaps'>d</hi>.</note> first I will relate to you something
that Diogenes did, which the many will
ridicule but to me it seems most dignified. Once
when, in a crowd of people among whom was
Diogenes, a certain youth made an unseemly noise,
Diogenes struck him with his staff and said <q>And
so, vile wretch, though you have done nothing
that would give you the right to take such liberties
in public, you are beginning here and before us
to show your scorn of opinion?</q> So convinced
was he that a man ought to subdue pleasure and
passion before he proceeds to the final encounter of
all<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Oration</hi> 1. 40 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b</hi>, 2. 74 <hi rend='smallcaps'>c</hi>, notes.</note> and strips to wrestle with those opinions which
to the multitude are the cause of evils innumerable.)
</p>

<p>
Οὐκ οἶσθα ὅπως τοὺς μὲν νέους τῆς
φιλοσοφίας ἀπάγουσιν, ἄλλα ἐπ᾽ ἄλλοις τῶν
<pb n='050'/><anchor id='Pg050'/><anchor id='Pg051'/>
φιλοσόφων θρυλοῦντες; οἱ Πυθαγόρου καὶ
Πλάτωνος καὶ Ἀριστοτέλους χορευταὶ γνήσιοι
γόητες εἶναι λέγονται καὶ σοφισταὶ καὶ τετυφωμένοι
καὶ φαρμακεῖς. [198] τῶν Κυνικῶν εἴ που τις
γέγονε σπουδαῖος, ἐλεεινὸς δοκεῖ· μέμνημαι γοῦν
ἐγώ ποτε τροφέως εἰπόντος πρός με, ἐπειδὴ τὸν
ἑταῖρον εἶδεν Ἰφικλέα αὐχμηρὰν ἔχοντα τὴν
κόμην καὶ κατερρωγότα τὰ στέρνα ἱμάτιόν τε
παντάπασι φαῦλον ἐν δεινῷ χειμῶνι· τίς ἄρα
δαίμων τοῦτον εἰς ταύτην περιέτρεψε τὴν συμφοράν,
ὑφ᾽ ἧς αὐτὸς μὲν ἐλεεινός, ἐλεεινότεροι δὲ
οἱ πατέρες αὐτοῦ, θρέψαντες σὺν ἐπιμελείᾳ καὶ
παιδεύσαντες ὡς ἐνεδέχετο σπουδαίως, [B] ὁ δὲ οὕτω
νῦν περιέρχεται, πάντα ἀφείς, οὐδὲν τῶν προσαιτούντων
κρείττων; ἐκείνου μὲν οὖν ἐγὼ οὐκ οἶδ᾽
ὅπως τότε κατειρωνευσάμην· εὖ μέντοι γε ἴσθι
ταῦτα καὶ<note place='foot'>ταῦτα καὶ Hertlein suggests, καὶ ταῦτα MSS.</note> ὑπὲρ τῶν ἀληθῶς κυνῶν τοὺς πολλοὺς
διανοουμένους. καὶ οὐ τοῦτο δεινόν ἐστιν, ἀλλ᾽
ὁρᾷς ὅτι καὶ πλοῦτον ἀγαπᾶν πείθουσι καὶ πενίαν
μισεῖν καὶ τὴν γαστέρα θεραπεύειν καὶ τοῦ
σώματος ἕνεκα πάντα ὑπομένειν πόνον καὶ
πιαίνειν τὸν τῆς ψυχῆς δεσμὸν καὶ τράπεζαν
παρατίθεσθαι πολυτελῆ [C] καὶ μηδέποτε νύκτωρ
καθεύδειν μόνον, ἀλλὰ τὰ τοιαῦτα πάντα δρᾶν ἐν
τῷ σκότῳ λανθάνοντα; τοῦτο οὐκ ἔστι τοῦ Ταρτάρου
χεῖρον; οὐ βέλτιόν ἐστιν ὑπὸ τὴν Χάρυβδιν
καὶ τὸν Κωκυτὸν καὶ μυρίας ὀργυιὰς κατὰ γῆς
δῦναι, ἢ πεσεῖν εἰς τοιοῦτον βίον αἰδοίοις καὶ
γαστρὶ δουλεύοντα, καὶ οὐδὲ τούτοις ἁπλῶς
ὥσπερ τὰ θηρία, πράγματα δὲ ἔχειν, ὡς ἂν καὶ
<pb n='052'/><anchor id='Pg052'/><anchor id='Pg053'/>
λάθοιμεν ὑπὸ τῷ σκότῳ ταῦτα ἐξεργαζόμενοι;
καίτοι πόσῳ [D] κρεῖττον ἀπέχεσθαι παντάπασιν
αὐτῶν; εἰ δὲ μὴ ῥᾴδιον, οἱ Διογένους νόμοι καὶ
Κράτητος ὑπὲρ τούτων οὐκ ἀτιμαστέοι· ἔρωτα
λύει λιμός, ἂν δὲ τούτῳ χρῆσθαι μὴ δύνῃ,<note place='foot'>δύνῃ Hertlein suggests, cf. Diogenes Laertius 6. 5. 2;
δύνασαι MSS.</note> βρόχος.
οὐκ οἶσθα, ὅτι ταῦτα ἔπραξαν ἐκεῖνοι τῷ βίῳ
διδόντες ὁδὸν εὐτελείας; οὐ γὰρ ἐκ τῶν μαζοφάγων,
φησὶν ὁ Διογένης, [199] οἱ τύραννοι, ἀλλ᾽ ἐκ
τῶν δειπνούντων πολυτελῶς. καὶ ὁ Κράτης μέντοι
πεποίηκεν ὕμνον εἰς τὴν Εὐτέλειαν·
</p>

<p>
(Do you not know how people lure away the young
from philosophy by continually uttering now one
slander and then another against all the philosophers
in turn? The genuine disciples of Pythagoras and
Plato and Aristotle are called sorcerers and sophists
and conceited and quacks. If here and there among
the Cynics one is really virtuous he is regarded with
pity. For instance I remember that once my tutor
said to me when he saw my fellow-pupil Iphicles with
his hair unkempt and his clothes in tatters on his
chest and wearing a wretched cloak in severe winter
weather: <q>What evil genius can have plunged
him into this sad state which makes not only
him pitiable but even more so his parents who
reared him with care and gave him the best education
they could! And now he goes about in this condition,
neglecting everything and no better than a beggar!</q>
At the time I answered him with some pleasantry
or other. But I assure you that the multitude hold
these views about genuine Cynics also. And that
is not so dreadful, but do you see that they
persuade them to love wealth, to hate poverty,
to minister to the belly, to endure any toil for the
body's sake, to fatten that prison of the soul, to
keep up an expensive table, never to sleep alone
at night,<note place='foot'>Cf. Plato, <hi rend='italic'>Epistles</hi> 326 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b</hi>.</note> provided only that they do all this in
the dark and are not found out? Is not this worse
than Tartarus? Is it not better to sink beneath
Charybdis and Cocytus or ten thousand fathoms
deep in the earth<note place='foot'>An echo of Xenophon, <hi rend='italic'>Anabasis</hi> 7. 1. 29.</note> than to fall into a life like
this, enslaved to lust and appetite, and not even
to these simply and openly, like the beasts, but
to take pains so that when we act thus we may
be hidden under cover of darkness? And yet
much better is it to refrain altogether from all
this! And if that be difficult the rules of Diogenes
and Crates on these matters are not to be despised:
<q>Fasting quenches desire, and if you cannot
fast, hang yourself.</q><note place='foot'>Diogenes Laertius 6. 86; <hi rend='italic'>Palatine Anthology</hi> 9. 497;
Julian paraphrases the verses of Crates, cf. Crates <hi rend='italic'>fr.</hi> 14,
Diels.</note> Do you not know that those
great men lived as they did in order to introduce
among men the way of plain living? "For," says
Diogenes, <q>it is not among men who live on bread
that you will find tyrants, but among those who eat
costly dinners.</q> Moreover Crates wrote a hymn
to Plain Living:)
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<lg>
<l>Χαῖρε, θεὰ δέσποινα, σοφῶν ἀνδρῶν ἀγάπημα,</l>
<l>Εὐτελίη, κλεινῆς ἔγγονε Σωφροσύνης.</l>
</lg>

<p>
(<q>Hail, goddess and Queen, darling
of wise men, Plain Living, child of glorious Temperance.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Palatine Anthology</hi> 10. 104.</note>)
</p>

</quote>

<p>
ἔστω δὴ μὴ κατὰ τὸν Οἰνόμαον ὁ κύων ἀναιδὴς
μηδὲ ἀναίσχυντος μηδὲ ὑπερόπτης πάντων ὁμοῦ
θείων τε καὶ ἀνθρωπίνων, ἀλλὰ εὐλαβὴς μὲν τὰ
πρὸς τὸ θεῖον, ὥσπερ Διογένης· [B] ἐπείσθη γοῦν
ἐκεῖνος τῷ Πυθίῳ, καὶ οὐ μετεμέλησεν αὐτῷ πεισθέντι·
εἰ δὲ, ὅτι μὴ προσῄει μηδὲ ἐθεράπευε τοὺς
νεὼς μηδὲ τὰ ἀγάλματα μηδὲ τοὺς βωμούς, οἴεταί
τις ἀθεότητος εἶναι σημεῖον, οὐκ ὀρθῶς νομίζει·
ἦν γὰρ οὐδὲν αὐτῷ τῶν τοιούτων, οὐ λιβανωτός, οὐ
σπονδή, οὐκ ἀργύριον, ὅθεν αὐτὰ πρίαιτο. εἰ δὲ
ἐνόει περὶ θεῶν ὀρθῶς, ἤρκει τοῦτο μόνον· αὐτῇ γὰρ
αὐτοὺς ἐθεράπευε<note place='foot'>ἑθεράπευε Hertlein suggests, ἐθεράπευσε MSS.</note> τῇ ψυχῇ, διδοὺς οἶμαι τὰ
τιμιώτατα τῶν ἑαυτοῦ, τὸ καθοσιῶσαι τὴν ἑαυτοῦ
ψυχὴν διὰ τῶν ἐννοιῶν. [C] ἀπερυθριάτω δὲ μηδαμῶς,
ἀλλ᾽ ἑπόμενος τῷ λόγῳ πρότερον μὲν
αὑτῷ χειρόηθες καταστησάτω τὸ παθηματικὸν
<pb n='054'/><anchor id='Pg054'/><anchor id='Pg055'/>
τῆς ψυχῆς μόριον, ὥστε παντάπασιν ἐξελεῖν
αὐτὸ καὶ μηδὲ ὅτι κρατεῖ τῶν ἡδονῶν εἰδέναι.
εἰς τοῦτο γὰρ ἄμεινον ἐλθεῖν, εἰς τὸ καί, εἰ πάσχει
τις τὰ τοιαῦτα, ὅλως ἀγνοῆσαι· τοῦτο δὲ ἡμῖν
οὐκ ἄλλως ἢ διὰ τῶν γυμνασιῶν προσγένεται.
ἵνα δὲ μή τις ὑπολάβῃ με ταῦτα ἄλλως λέγειν,
ἐκ τῶν [D] παιγνίων Κράτητος ὀλίγα σοι παραγράψω·
</p>

<p>
(Then let not the Cynic be like Oenomaus
shameless or impudent, or a scorner of everything
human and divine, but reverent towards sacred things,
like Diogenes. For he obeyed the Pythian oracle nor
did he repent of his obedience. But if anyone
supposes that because he did not visit the temples
or worship statues or altars this is a sign of impiety,
he does not think rightly. For Diogenes possessed
nothing that is usually offered, incense or libations
or money to buy them with. But if he held right
opinions about the gods, that in itself was enough.
For he worshipped them with his whole soul, thus
offering them as I think the most precious of his
possessions, the dedication of his soul through his
thoughts. Let not the Cynic be shameless, but led by
reason let him first make subservient to himself the
emotional part of his soul so that he may entirely do
away with it and not even be aware that he is superior
to pleasures. For it is nobler to attain to this, I
mean to complete ignorance whether one has any
such emotions. And this comes to us only through
training. And that none may think I say this at
random I will add for your benefit a few lines from
the lighter verse of Crates:<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>I.e.</hi> parodies such as the verses here quoted which parody
Solon's prayer <hi rend='italic'>fr.</hi> 12, Bergk; cf. 213 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b</hi>.</note>)
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<lg>
<l>Μνημοσύνης καὶ Ζηνὸς Ὀλυμπίου ἀγλαὰ τέκνα,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Μοῦσαι Πιερίδες, κλῦτέ μοι εὐχομένῳ·</l>
<l>Χόρτον ἀεὶ συνεχῶς δότε γαστέρι, ἥτε μοι αἰεὶ</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Χωρὶς δουλοσύνης λιτὸν ἔθηκε βίον.</l>
</lg>

<p>
(<q>Glorious children of
Memory and Olympian Zeus, ye Muses of Pieria,
hearken to my prayer! Give me without ceasing
victuals for my belly which has always made my life
frugal and free from slavery....</q>)
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Ὠφέλιμον δὲ φίλοις, μὴ γλυκερὸν τίθετε.</l>
<l>Χρήματα δ᾽ οὐκ ἐθέλω συνάγειν κλυτά, κανθάρου ὄλβον<note place='foot'>ὄλβον Wright, cf. 213<hi rend='smallcaps'>b</hi>, οἶτον MSS., Hertlein.</note></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>[200] Μύρμηκός τ᾽ ἄφενος χρήματα μαιόμενος,</l>
<l>Ἀλλὰ δικαιοσύνης μετέχειν καὶ πλοῦτον ἀγείρειν<note place='foot'>ἀγείρειν Cobet, ἀγινεῖν Hertlein, MSS.</note></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Εὔφορον, εὔκτητον, τίμιον εἰς ἀρετήν.</l>
<l>Τῶν δὲ τυχὼν Ἑρμῆν καὶ Μούσας ἱλάσομ᾽ ἁγνάς.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Οὐ δαπάναις τρυφεραῖς, ἀλλ᾽ ἀρεταῖς ὁσίαις.</l>
</lg>

<p>
(<q>To my friends
make me useful rather than agreeable. As for
money I desire not to amass conspicuous wealth,
seeking after the wealth of the beetle or the substance
of the ant; nay, I desire to possess justice
and to collect riches that are easily carried, easily
acquired, of great avail for virtue. If I may but win
these I will propitiate Hermes and the holy Muses
not with costly dainties but with pious virtues.</q>)
</p>

</quote>

<p>
εἰ χρή σοι περὶ [B] τούτων γράφειν, ἔχω πλείονα τοῦ
ἀνδρός. ἐντυχὼν δὲ τῷ Χαιρωνεῖ Πλουτάρχῳ τὸν
Κράτητος ἀναγράψαντι βίον οὐδὲν ἐκ παρέργου
μανθάνειν δεήσει τὸν ἄνδρα.
</p>

<p>
(If it be of any use to write for you about such things I
could recite still more maxims by this same Crates.
But if you will read Plutarch of Chaeronea, who
wrote his <hi rend='italic'>Life</hi>, there will be no need for you to learn
his character superficially from me.)
</p>

<p>
Ἀλλ᾽ ἐπανίωμεν ἐπ᾽ ἐκεῖνο πάλιν, ὅτι χρὴ τὸν
ἀρχόμενον κυνίζειν [C] αὑτῷ πρότερον ἐπιτιμᾶν
<pb n='056'/><anchor id='Pg056'/><anchor id='Pg057'/>
πικρῶς καὶ ἐξελέγχειν καὶ μὴ κολακεύειν, ἀλλὰ
ἐξετάζειν ὅ,τι μάλιστα αὑτὸν ἀκριβῶς, εἰ τῇ
πολυτελείᾳ τῶν σιτίων χαίρει, εἰ στρωμνῆς δεῖται
μαλακῆς, εἰ τιμῆς ἢ δόξης ἐστὶν ἥττων, εἰ τοῦτο
ζηλοῖ τὸ περιβλέπεσθαι καί, εἰ καὶ κενὸν εἴη,
τίμιον ὅμως νομίζει. μηδὲ εἰς συμπεριφορὰν
ὄχλων [D] καθυφείσθω,<note place='foot'>καθυφείσθω Hertlein suggests, καθείσθω MSS.</note> γενέσθω δὲ τρυφῆς μηδὲ
ἄκρῳ, φασί, τῷ δακτύλωι, ἕως ἂν αὐτὴν παντελῶς
πατήσῃ. τότε ἤδη καὶ τῶν τοιούτων, ἂν προσπίπτῃ,
θιγεῖν οὐδὲν κωλύει. ἐπεὶ καὶ τῶν
ταύρων ἀκούω τοὺς ἀσθενεστέρους ἐξίστασθαι
τῆς ἀγέλης καὶ καθ᾽ ἑαυτοὺς νεμομένους ἀγείρειν
τὴν ἰσχὺν ἐν μέρει καὶ κατ᾽ ὀλίγον, εἶθ᾽ οὕτως
ἐπιέναι καὶ προκαλεῖσθαι καὶ τῆς ἀγέλης ἀμφισβητεῖν
τοῖς προκατέχουσιν, ὡς μᾶλλον ἀξιωτέρους
προΐστασθαι. ὅστις οὖν κυνίζειν ἐθέλει
μήτε τὸν τρίβωνα [201] μήτε τὴν πήραν μήτε τὴν βακτηρίαν
καὶ τὴν κόμην ἀγαπάτω μόνον, ἵν᾽ ὥσπερ
ἐν κώμῃ βαδίζῃ κουρείων καὶ διδασκαλείων ἐνδεεῖ
ἄκαρτος καὶ ἀγράμματος, ἀλλὰ τὸν λόγον ἀντὶ
τοῦ σκήπτρον καὶ τὴν ἔνστασιν ἀντὶ τῆς πήρας
τῆς κυνικῆς ὑπολαμβανέτω φιλοσοφίας γνωρίσματα.
παρρησίᾳ δὲ χρηστέον αὐτῷ πρῶτον
ὁπόσου πέφυκεν ἄξιος ἐπιδειξαμένῳ, ὥσπερ οἶμαι
Κράτης καὶ Διογένης, οἵ πᾶσαν μὲν ἀπειλὴν
τύχης καὶ [B] εἴτε παιδιὰν εἴτε παροινίαν χρὴ φάναι
<pb n='058'/><anchor id='Pg058'/><anchor id='Pg059'/>
τοσοῦτον ἀπέσχον τοῦ δυσκόλως ἐνεγκεῖν, ὥστε
ἁλοὺς μὲν ὑπὸ τῶν καταποντιστῶν ὁ Διογένης
ἔπαιζεν, ὁ Κράτης δὲ ἐδημοσίευε τὴν οὐσίαν, εἶτα
τὸ σῶμα βλαβεὶς ἔσκωπτεν ἑαυτὸν εἰς τὴν
χωλότητα τοῦ σκέλους καὶ τὸ κυρτὸν τῶν ὤμων,
ἐπορεύετο δὲ ἐπὶ τὰς τῶν φίλων ἑστίας ἄκλητος
καὶ<note place='foot'>Before κεκλημένος Cobet adds καὶ; cf. Oration 8. 250 <hi rend='smallcaps'>c</hi>.</note> κεκλημένος, διαλλάσσων τοὺς οἰκειοτάτους
ἀλλήλοις, εἴποτε στασιάζοντας αἴσθοιτο, ἐπετίμα
δὲ οὐ μετὰ πικρίας, [C] ἀλλὰ μετὰ χάριτος, οὐχ ἵνα
συκοφαντεῖν δοκῇ τοὺς σωφρονισθέντας, ὠφελεῖν
δὲ ἐθέλων αὐτούς τε ἐκείνους καὶ τοὺς ἀκούοντας.
</p>

<p>
(But let me go back to what I said before, that he
who is entering on the career of a Cynic ought first
censure severely and cross-examine himself, and
without any self-flattery ask himself the following
questions in precise terms: whether he enjoys
expensive food; whether he cannot do without a
soft bed; whether he is the slave of rewards and the
opinion of men; whether it is his ambition to attract
public notice and even though that be an empty
honour<note place='foot'>An echo of Euripides, <hi rend='italic'>Phoenissae</hi> 551, περιβλέπεσθαι
τίμιον, κενὸν μὲν οὖν.</note> he still thinks it worth while. Nevertheless
he must not let himself drift with the current of the
mob or touch vulgar pleasure even with the tip of
his finger, as the saying is, until he has succeeded
in trampling on it; then and not before he may
permit himself to dip into that sort of thing if it
come his way. For instance I am told that bulls
which are weaker than the rest separate themselves
from the herd and pasture alone while they store up
their strength in every part of their bodies by
degrees, until they rejoin the herd in good condition,
and then they challenge its leaders to contend with
them, in confidence that they are more fit to take the
lead. Therefore let him who wishes to be a Cynic
philosopher not adopt merely their long cloak or
wallet or staff or their way of wearing the hair, as
though he were like a man walking unshaved and
illiterate in a village that lacked barbers' shops and
schools, but let him consider that reason rather than
a staff and a certain plan of life rather than a wallet
are the mintmarks of the Cynic philosophy. And
freedom of speech he must not employ until he have
first proved how much he is worth, as I believe was
the case with Crates and Diogenes. For they were
so far from bearing with a bad grace any threat of
fortune, whether one call such threats caprice or
wanton insult, that once when he had been captured
by pirates Diogenes joked with them; as for Crates
he gave his property to the state, and being
physically deformed he made fun of his own lame
leg and hunched shoulders. But when his friends
gave an entertainment he used to go, whether
invited or not,<note place='foot'>Thucydides 1. 118.</note> and would reconcile his nearest
friends if he learned that they had quarrelled.
He used to reprove them not harshly but with
a charming manner and not so as to seem to
persecute those whom he wished to reform, but
as though he wished to be of use both to them
and to the bystanders.)
</p>

<p>
Καὶ οὐ τοῦτο ῆν τὸ προηγούμενον αὐτοῖς τέλος·
ἀλλ᾽, ὅπερ ἔφην, ἐσκόπουν ὅπως αὐτοὶ μὲν
εὐδαιμονήσουσιν,<note place='foot'>εὐδαιμονήσουσιν Hertlein suggests, εὐδαιμονήσωσιν MSS.</note> ἔμελε δὲ αὐτοῖς τῶν ἄλλων τοσοῦτον
ὅσον ξυνίεσαν οἶμαι φύσει κοινωνικὸν καὶ
πολιτικὸν ζῷον τὸν ἄνθρωπον εἶναι, καὶ τοὺς συμπολιτευομένους
ὠφέλησαν οὐ τοῖς παραδείγμασι
μόνον, ἀλλὰ καὶ τοῖς λόγοις. [D] ὅστις οὖν ἂν ἐθέλῃ
Κυνικὸς εἶναι καὶ σπουδαῖος ἀνήρ, αὑτοῦ πρότερον
ἐπιμεληθείς, ὥσπερ Διογένης καὶ Κράτης
ἐξελαυνέτω μὲν τῆς ψυχῆς ἅπαντα ἐκ πάσης τὰ
πάθη, ὀρθῷ δὲ ἐπιτρέψας τὰ καθ᾽ ἑαυτὸν λόγῳ
καὶ νῷ κυβερνάσθω. κεφάλαιον γὰρ ἦν, ὡς ἐγὼ
οἶμαι, τοῦτο τῆς Διογένους φιλοσοφίας.
</p>

<p>
(Yet this was not the chief end and aim of those
Cynics, but as I said their main concern was how
they might themselves attain to happiness and, as I
think, they occupied themselves with other men only
in so far as they comprehended that man is by nature
a social and political animal; and so they aided their
fellow-citizens, not only by practising but by
preaching as well. Then let him who wishes to be
a Cynic, earnest and sincere, first take himself in
hand like Diogenes and Crates, and expel from his
own soul and from every part of it all passions and
desires, and entrust all his affairs to reason and
intelligence and steer his course by them. For this
in my opinion was the sum and substance of the
philosophy of Diogenes.)
</p>

<p>
Εἰ δὲ ἑταίρᾳ ποτὲ προσῆλθεν ὁ ἀνήρ· καίτοι
καὶ τοῦτο τυχὸν ἅπαξ ἢ οὐδὲ ἅπαξ ἐγένετο·
ὅταν ἡμῖν [202] τὰ ἄλλα κατὰ τὸν Διογένη γένηται
<pb n='060'/><anchor id='Pg060'/><anchor id='Pg061'/>
σπουδαῖος, ἂν αὐτῷ<note place='foot'>αὐτῷ Cobet, οὕτω Hertlein, MSS.</note> φανῇ καὶ τοιοῦτόν τι
δρᾶν<note place='foot'>δρᾶν, Petavius, φάναι Hertlein, MSS.</note> φανερῶς ἐν ὀφθαλμοὶς πάντων, οὐ μεμψόμεθα
οὐδὲ αἰτιασόμεθα. πρότερον μέντοι τὴν
Διογένους ἡμῖν ἐπιδειξάμενος εὐμάθειαν καὶ τὴν
ἀγχίνοιαν καὶ τὴν ἐν τοῖς ἄλλοις ἅπασιν ἐλευθερίαν,
αὐτάρκειαν, δικαιοσύνην, σωφροσύνην,
εὐλάβειαν, χάριν, προσοχήν, ὡς μηδὲν εἰκῇ μηδὲ
μάτην μηδὲ ἀλόγως ποιεῖν· [B] ἐπεὶ καὶ ταῦτα τῆς
Διογένους ἐστὶ φιλοσοφίας οἰκεῖα· πατείτω τῦφον,
καταπαιζέτω τῶν τὰ μὲν ἀναγκαῖα τῆς φύσεως
ἔργα κρυπτόντων ἐν σκότῳ· φημὶ δὲ τῶν περιττωμάτων
τὰς ἐκκρίσεις· ἐν μέσαις δὲ ταῖς ἀγοραῖς
καὶ ταῖς πόλεσιν ἐπιτηδευόντων τὰ βιαιότατα καὶ
μηδὲν ἡμῶν οἰκεῖα τῇ φύσει, χρημάτων ἁρπαγάς,
συκοφαντίας, γραφὰς ἀδίκους, διώξεις ἄλλων
τοιούτων συρφετωδῶν πραγμάτων. ἐπεὶ καὶ
Διογένης εἴτε [C] ἀπέπαρδεν εἴτε ἀπεπάτησεν εἴτε
ἄλλο τι τοιοῦτον ἔπραξεν, ὥσπερ οὖν λέγουσιν,
ἐν ἀγορᾷ, τὸν ἐκείνων πατῶν τῦφον ἐποίει, διδάσκων
αὐτούς, ὅτι πολλῷ φαυλότερα καὶ χαλεπώτερα
τούτων ἐπιτηδεύουσι. τὰ μὲν γάρ ἐστιν ἡμῖν
πᾶσι κατὰ φύσιν, τὰ δὲ ὡς ἔπος εἰπεῖν οὐδενί,
πάντα δὲ ἐκ διαστροφῆς ἐπιτηδεύεται.
</p>

<p>
(And if Diogenes did sometimes visit a courtesan&mdash;though
even this happened only once perhaps or
not even once&mdash;let him who would be a Cynic first
satisfy us that he is, like Diogenes, a man of solid
worth, and then if he see fit to do that sort of thing
openly and in the sight of all men, we shall not
reproach him with it or accuse him. First however
we must see him display the ability to learn and the
quick wit of Diogenes, and in all other relations he
must show the same independence, self-sufficiency,
justice, moderation, piety, gratitude, and the same
extreme carefulness not to act at random or without
a purpose or irrationally. For these too are characteristic
of the philosophy of Diogenes. Then let
him trample on vaingloriousness, let him ridicule
those who though they conceal in darkness the
necessary functions of our nature&mdash;for instance the
secretion of what is superfluous&mdash;yet in the centre
of the market-place and of our cities carry on
practices that are most brutal and by no means akin
to our nature, for instance robbery of money, false
accusations, unjust indictments, and the pursuit of
other rascally business of the same sort. On the
other hand when Diogenes made unseemly noises or
obeyed the call of nature or did anything else of
that sort in the market-place, as they say he did, he
did so because he was trying to trample on the
conceit of the men I have just mentioned, and to
teach them that their practices were far more sordid
and insupportable than his own. For what he did
was in accordance with the nature of all of us, but
theirs accorded with no man's real nature, one may
say, but were all due to moral depravity.)
</p>

<p>
Ἀλλ᾽ οἱ νῦν τοῦ Διογένους ζηλωταὶ τὸ ῥᾷστον
καὶ κουφότατον ἑλόμενοι τὸ κρεῖττον οὐκ εἶδον·
σύ τε ἐκείνων [D] εἶναι σεμνότερος ἐθέλων ἀπεπλανήθης
<pb n='062'/><anchor id='Pg062'/><anchor id='Pg063'/>
τοσοῦτον τῆς Διογένους προαιρέσεως, ὥστε
αὐτὸν ἐλεεινὸν ἐνόμισας. εἰ δὲ τούτοις μὲν ἠπίστεις
ὑπὲρ ἀνδρὸς λεγομένοις, ὃν οἱ πάντες Ἕλληνες
τότε ἐθαύμασαν μετὰ Σωκράτη καὶ Πυθαγόραν
ἐπὶ Πλάτωνος καὶ Ἀριστοτέλους, οὗ γέγονεν
ἀκροατῆς ὁ τοῦ σωφρονεστάτου καὶ συνετωτάτου
Ζήνωνος καθηγεμών, οὓς οὐκ εἰκὸς ἦν ἅπαντας
ἀπατηθῆναι περὶ ἀνδρὸς οὕτω φαύλου, ὁποῖον σὺ
διακωμῳδεῖς, [203] ὦ βέλτιστε, ἴσως ἄν τι πλέον
ἐσκόπησας περὶ αὐτοῦ καὶ πορρωτέρω προῆλθες
τῆς ἐμπειρίας τἀνδρός. τίνα γὰρ οὐκ ἐξέπληξε
τῶν Ἑλλήνων ἡ Διογένους καρτερία, βασιλικῆς
οὐκ ἔξω μεγαλοψυχίας οὖσα, καὶ φιλοπονία;
ἐκάθευδεν ἁνὴρ ἐπὶ στιβάδος ἐν τῷ πίθῳ βέλτιον
ἢ μέγας βασιλεὺς ὑπὸ τοῖς ἐπιχρύσοις ὀρόφοις ἐν
τῇ μαλθακῇ κλίνῃ, ἤσθιε τὴν μᾶζαν ἥδιον ἢ σὺ νῦν
τὰς Σικελικὰς [B] ἐσθίεις τραπέζας, ἐλούετο ψυχρῇ<note place='foot'>ψυχρῷ Naber, θερμῷ Hertlein, MSS.</note>
τὸ σῶμα πρὸς ἀέρα ξηραίνων ἀντὶ τῶν ὀθονίων,
οἷς σὺ ἀπομάττῃ, φιλοσοφώτατε. πάνυ σοι
προσήκει κωμῳδεῖν ἐκεῖνον, ὅτι κατειργάσω τὸν
Ξέρξην, ὡς ὁ Θεμιστοκλῆς, ἢ τὸν Δαρεῖον, ὡς ὁ
Μακεδὼν Ἀλέξανδρος. εἰ σμικρὰ τὰς βίβλους
ἀνελίττων ἐμελέτας ὥσπερ ἡμεῖς οἱ πολιτικοὶ καὶ
πολυπράγμονες, ἔγνως ἄν, ὅπως Ἀλέξανδρος
ἀγασθῆναι λέγεται τὴν Διογένους μεγαλοψυχίαν.
ἀλλ᾽ οὐκ ἔστι σοι τούτων οὐδέν, ὡς ἐμοὶ δοκεῖ,
<pb n='064'/><anchor id='Pg064'/><anchor id='Pg065'/>
σπουδαῖον· πόθεν; πολλοῦ γε καὶ δεῖ· γυναικῶν
ἀθλίων τεθαύμακας φιλονεικῶν<note place='foot'>φιλονεικῶν Hertlein suggests, φιλῶν νεκρὸν, MSS.</note> βίον.
</p>

<p>
(In our own day, however, the imitators of
Diogenes have chosen only what is easiest and least
burdensome and have failed to see his nobler side.
And as for you, in your desire to be more dignified
than those early Cynics you have strayed so far from
Diogenes' plan of life that you thought him an object
of pity. But if you did not believe all this that I
say about a man whom all the Greeks in the
generation of Plato and Aristotle admired next to
Socrates and Pythagoras, a man whose pupil was the
teacher of the most modest and most wise Zeno,&mdash;and
it is not likely that they were all deceived about a man
as contemptible as you make him out to be in your
travesty,&mdash;well, in that case, my dear sir, perhaps you
might have studied his character more carefully and
you would have progressed further in your knowledge
of the man. Was there, I ask, a single Greek who
was not amazed by the endurance of Diogenes
and by his perseverance, which had in it a truly
royal greatness of soul? The man used to sleep in
his jar on a bed of leaves more soundly than the
Great King on his soft couch under a gilded roof; he
used to eat his crust<note place='foot'>Cf. Dio Chrysostom, <hi rend='italic'>Oration</hi> 6. 12, Arnim.</note> with a better appetite than
you now eat your Sicilian courses<note place='foot'>A proverb; Sicily was famous for good cooking; cf.
Plato, <hi rend='italic'>Republic</hi> 404 <hi rend='smallcaps'>d</hi>; Horace, <hi rend='italic'>Odes</hi> 1. 1. 18, <q>Siculae dapes.</q></note>; he used to bathe
his body in cold water and dry himself in the open
air instead of with the linen towels with which you
rub yourself down, my most philosophic friend! It
becomes you well to ridicule him because, I suppose,
like Themistocles you conquered Xerxes, or Darius
like Alexander of Macedon. But if you had the
least habit of reading books as I do, though I am a
statesman and engrossed in public affairs, you would
know how much Alexander is said to have admired
Diogenes' greatness of soul. But you care little, I
suppose, for any of these things. How should you
care? Far from it!<note place='foot'>Demosthenes, <hi rend='italic'>De Corona</hi> 47.</note> You admire and emulate the
life of wretched women.)
</p>

<p>
Εἰ μὲν οὖν ὁ λόγος τι πλέον ἐποίησεν, οὐκ ἐμὸν
μᾶλλον ἢ σόν ἐστι κέρδος· εἰ δὲ οὐδὲν περαίνομεν
ἐκ τοῦ παραχρῆμα περὶ τῶν τοιούτων ἀπνευστὶ
τὸ δὴ λεγόμενον συνείραντες· ἔστι γὰρ πάρεργον
ἡμέραιν δυοῖν, ὡς ἴσασιν αἱ Μοῦσαι, μᾶλλον δὲ
καὶ σὺ<note place='foot'>σὺ Reiske adds, παραμενέτω μέν σοι Reiske conjectures,
lacuna Hertlein, MSS.</note> αὐτός· παραμενέτω μέν σοι ὁπόσα
πρόσθεν ἐγνώκεις, ἡμῖν δὲ οὐ μεταμελήσει τῆς
εἰς τὸν ἄνδρα εὐφημίας.
</p>

<p>
(However, if my discourse has improved you at all
you will have gained more than I. But even if I
accomplish nothing at the moment by writing on
such a great subject thus hastily, and, as the saying is,
without taking breath<note place='foot'>Demosthenes, <hi rend='italic'>De Corona</hi>, 308, cf. Vol. I. <hi rend='italic'>Oration</hi> 5. 178 <hi rend='smallcaps'>d</hi>.</note>&mdash;for I gave to it only the
leisure of two days, as the Muses or rather you yourself
will bear me witness&mdash;then do you abide by
your former opinions, but I at any rate shall never
regret having spoken of that great man with due
reverence.)
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='069'/><anchor id='Pg069'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Oration VII</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Introduction to Oration VII</head>

<p>
The Seventh Oration is directed against the
Cynic Heracleios, who had ventured to recite before
an audience when Julian was present a myth
or allegory in which the gods were irreverently
handled. Julian raises the question whether fables
and myths are suitable for a Cynic discourse. He
names the regular divisions of philosophy and decides
that the use of myths may properly be allowed only
to ethical philosophers and writers on theology:
that myth is intended always as a means of religious
teaching and should be addressed to children and
those whose intellect does not allow them to
envisage the truth without some such assistance.
In Sallust's treatise <hi rend='italic'>On the Gods and the World</hi> he
gives much the same account of the proper function
of myths and divides them into five species, giving
examples of each. <q>To wish to teach the whole
truth about the gods to all produces contempt
in the foolish, because they cannot understand,
and lack of zeal in the good; whereas to conceal
the truth by myths prevents the contempt of the
foolish and compels the good to practise philosophy.</q><note place='foot'>Murray's translation of Sallust in <hi rend='italic'>Four Stages of Greek
Religion</hi>, New York, 1912.</note>
This is precisely the opinion of Julian as expressed
<pb n='070'/><anchor id='Pg070'/>
in the Fifth, Sixth and Seventh Orations. Though
both Julian and Sallust explain the myths away they
are never rationalistic, and never offer the least excuse
for scepticism. Julian's explanation of the Semele
myth,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Oration</hi> 7, 219.</note> which makes Semele an inspired prophetess
and not the mother of Dionysus, tends to the
greater glory of the god. The conclusion is that
Heracleios should not have used myth at all, but
in any case he used the wrong sort and wrote
in the wrong spirit. He should have used such
a myth as that composed by Prodicus the sophist
on the Choice of Heracles at the Crossroads, an
allegory which is more than once cited by Julian
and was a favourite illustration in later Greek
literature.<note place='foot'>Cf. Vol. I, <hi rend='italic'>Oration</hi> 2. 56 <hi rend='smallcaps'>d</hi>.</note>
</p>

<p>
To show Heraclius what he might have written
with propriety Julian adds a parable of his own
modelled on that of Prodicus. In this he himself
plays the part of a second Heracles, and takes
the opportunity to vilify Constantius and point out
his own mission of reformer and restorer of order
and religion to the Empire. Throughout the parable
there are striking resemblances with the First
Oration of Dio Chrysostom, and Asmus<note place='foot'>Asmus, <hi rend='italic'>Julian und Dion Chrysostomus</hi>, 1895; cf.
Praechter, <hi rend='italic'>Archiv für Geschichte der Philosophie</hi> 5. <hi rend='italic'>Dion
Chrysostomus als Quelle Julians.</hi> Julian only once mentions
Dio by name, <hi rend='italic'>Oration</hi> 7, 212 <hi rend='smallcaps'>c</hi>.</note> has made
a detailed comparison of the two writers to prove
that Julian wrote with Dio before him. In many
of these parallels both Julian and Dio can be traced
to a common classical source, usually Plato, but there
is no doubt that Julian was thoroughly familiar with
<pb n='071'/><anchor id='Pg071'/>
the work of Dio and often used the same
illustrations. Themistius<note place='foot'>Themistius, 280 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a</hi>.</note> however uses the Prodicus
myth in much the same words as Dio, and it is
imitated also by Maximus of Tyre.<note place='foot'>Maximus of Tyre, <hi rend='italic'>Dissertation</hi> 20.</note>
</p>

<p>
In conclusion Julian praises the earlier Cynics
and criticises the later, in much the same words as
he had used in the Sixth Oration.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='072'/><anchor id='Pg072'/><anchor id='Pg073'/>

<div>

<p>
[204] ΙΟΥΛΙΑΝΟΥ ΑΥΤΟΚΡΑΤΟΡΟΣ
</p>

<p>
(Julian, Emperor)
</p>

<p>
ΠΡΟΣ ΗΡΑΚΛΕΙΟΝ ΚΥΝΙΚΟΝ
</p>

<p>
(To the Cynic Heracleios)
</p>

<p>
ΠΕΡΙ ΤΟΥ ΠΩΣ ΚΥΝΙΣΤΕΟΝ ΚΑΙ ΕΙ ΠΡΕΠΕΙ ΤΩ ΚΥΝΙ
ΜΥΘΟΥΣ ΠΛΑΤΤΕΙΝ
</p>

<p>
(How a Cynic Ought to Behave, and Whether
it is Proper For Him to Compose Myths)
</p>

<p>
Ἦ πολλὰ γίνεται ἐν μακρῷ χρόνῳ· τοῦτο ἐκ
τῆς κωμῳδίας ἀκηκοότι μοι πρῴην ἐπῆλθεν ἐκβοῆσαι,
ὁπηνίκα παρακληθέντες ἠκροώμεθα κυνὸς
οὔτι τορὸν οὐδὲ γενναῖον ὑλακτοῦντος, ἀλλ᾽ ὥσπερ
αἱ τίτθαι μύθους ᾄδοντος καὶ οὐδὲ τούτους ὑγιῶς
διατιθεμένου. παραχρῆμα μὲν οὖν ἐπῆλθέ μοι
διαναστάντι διαλῦσαι τὸν σύλλογον· [B] ἐπεὶ δὲ
ἐχρῆν ὥσπερ ἐν θεάτρῳ κωμῳδουμένων Ἡρακλέους
καὶ Διονύσου παρὰ τῶν κωμῳδῶν ἀκούειν, οὐ τοῦ
λέγοντος, ἀλλὰ τῶν συνειλεγμένων χάριν ὑπέμεινα,
μάλλον δέ, εἰ χρή τι καὶ νεανικώτερον
εἰπεῖν, ἡμῶν αὐτῶν ἕνεκα καὶ τοῦ μὴ δοκεῖν ὑπὸ
δεισιδαιμονίας μᾶλλον [C] ἢ διανοίας εὐσεβοῦς καὶ
λελογισμένης, ὥσπερ αἱ πελειάδες, ὑπὸ τῶν ῥηματίων
σοβηθεὶς ἀναπτῆναι. ἔμενον δὲ ἐκεῖνο
πρὸς ἐμαυτὸν εἰπὼν
</p>

<p>
(<q>Truly with the lapse of time many things come
to pass!</q><note place='foot'>Eupolis <hi rend='italic'>fr.</hi> 4.</note> This verse I have heard in a comedy
and the other day I was tempted to proclaim it
aloud, when by invitation we attended the lecture of
a Cynic whose barking was neither distinct nor
noble; but he was crooning myths as nurses do, and
even these he did not compose in any profitable
fashion. For a moment my impulse was to rise and
break up the meeting. But though I had to listen
as one does when Heracles and Dionysus are being
caricatured in the theatre by comic poets,<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Misopogon</hi> 366 <hi rend='smallcaps'>c</hi>.</note> I bore it
to the end, not for the speaker's sake but for the
sake of the audience, or rather, if I may presume
to say so, it was still more for my own sake, so
that I might not seem to be moved by superstition
rather than by a pious and rational sentiment and
to be scared into flight by his miserable words
like a timid dove. So I stayed and repeated to
myself the famous line)
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<lg>
<l>Τέτλαθι δή, κραδίη, καὶ κύντερον ἄλλο ποτ᾽ ἔτλης,</l>
</lg>

<p>
(<q>Bear it my heart: yea
thou didst of yore endure things yet more shameful.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Odyssey</hi> 20. 18.</note>)
</p>

</quote>

<p>
ἀνάσχου καὶ κυνὸς ληροῦντος ὀλίγον ἡμέρας
<pb n='074'/><anchor id='Pg074'/><anchor id='Pg075'/>
μόριον, οὐ πρῶτον ἀκούεις τῶν θεῶν βλασφημουμένων,
οὐχ οὕτω τὰ κοινὰ πράττομεν καλῶς,
οὐχ οὕτω τῶν ἰδίων ἕνεκα σωφρονοῦμεν, οὐ
μὴν οὐδὲ εὐτυχεῖς [205] ἐσμεν, ὥστε τὰς ἀκοὰς
καθαρὰς ἔχειν ἢ τὸ τελευταῖον γοῦν τὰ ὄμματα
μὴ κεχράνθαι τοῖς παντοδαποῖς τουτουὶ τοῦ
σιδηροῦ γένους ἀσεβήμασιν. ἐπεὶ δὲ ὥσπερ
ἐνδεεῖς ἡμᾶς τῶν τοιούτων κακῶν ἀνέπλησεν οὐκ
εὐαγῶν ὁ κύων ῥημάτων τὸν ἄριστον τῶν θεῶν
ὀνομάσας, ὡς μήποτε ὤφελε μήτ᾽ ἐκεῖνος εἰπεῖν
μήτε ἡμεῖς ἀκοῦσαι, δεῦρο πειραθῶμεν αὐτὸν
ἐφ᾽ ὑμῶν διδάξαι, [B] πρῶτον μὲν ὅτι τῷ κυνὶ λόγους
μᾶλλον ἢ μύθους προσήκει γράφειν, εἶτα ὁποίας
καὶ τίνας χρὴ ποιεῖσθαι τὰς διασκευὰς τῶν μύθων,
εἴ τι ἄρα καὶ φιλοσοφία προσδεῖται τῆς μυθογραφίας,
ἐπὶ πᾶσι δὲ ὑπὲρ τῆς πρὸς τοὺς θεοὺς
εὐλαβείας ὀλίγα διαλέξομαι· τοῦτο γάρ μοι καὶ
τῆς εἰς ὑμᾶς παρόδου γέγονεν αἴτιον καίπερ οὐκ
ὄντι συγγραφικῷ καὶ τὸ ἐν τῷ πλήθει λέγειν
ὥσπερ ἄλλο τι τῶν ἐπαχθῶν καὶ σοφιστικῶν
τὸν ἔμπροσθεν [C] χρόνον παραιτησαμένῳ. μικρὰ δὲ
ὑπὲρ τοῦ μύθου καθάπερ τινὰ γενεαλογίαν ἴσως
οὐκ ἀνάρμοστον ἐμοί τε φάναι ὑμῖν τε ἀκοῦσαι.
</p>

<p>
(Endure for the brief fraction of a day even
a babbling Cynic! It is not the first time that thou
hast had to hear the gods blasphemed! Our state
is not so well governed, our private life is not so
virtuous, in a word we are not so favoured by fortune
that we can keep our ears pure or at any rate
our eyes at least undefiled by the many and various
impieties of this iron race. And now as though we
had not enough of such vileness this Cynic fills our
ears with his blasphemies, and has uttered the name
of the highest of the gods in such wise as would he
had never spoken nor I heard! But since he has
done this, come, let me in your presence try to teach
him this lesson; first that it is more becoming for a
Cynic to write discourses than myths; secondly,
what sort of adaptations of the myths he ought
to make, if indeed philosophy really needs mythology
at all; and finally I shall have a few words to
say about reverence for the gods. For it is with this
aim that I appear before you, I who have no talent
for writing and who have hitherto avoided addressing
the general public, as I have avoided all else that is
tedious and sophistical. But perhaps it is not
unsuitable for me to say and for you to hear a few
words about myth in general as a sort of genealogy
of that kind of writing.)
</p>

<p>
Τὴν μὲν οὖν ἀρχὴν ὁπόθεν ηὑρέθη καὶ ὅστις ὁ
πρῶτος ἐπιχειρήσας τὸ ψεῦδος πιθανῶς συνθεῖναι
πρὸς ὠφέλειαν ἢ ψυχαγωγίαν τῶν ἀκροωμώνων,
οὐ μᾶλλον εὔροι τις ἂν ἢ εἴ τις ἐπιχειρήσειε
τὸν πρῶτον πταρόντα ἢ χρεμψάμενον ἀναζητεῖν.
εἰ δέ, [D] ὥσπερ ἱππεῖς ἐν Θράκῃ καὶ Θετταλίᾳ,
<pb n='076'/><anchor id='Pg076'/><anchor id='Pg077'/>
τοξόται δὲ καὶ τὰ κουφότερα τῶν ὅπλων ἐν Ἰνδίᾳ
καὶ Κρήτῃ καὶ Καρίᾳ ἀνεφάνη,<note place='foot'>After Καρίᾳ Reiske suggests ἀνέφανη.</note> τῇ φύσει τῆς
χώρας ἀκολουθούντων οἶμαι τῶν ἐπιτηδευμάτων,
οὕτω τις ὑπολαμβάνει καὶ ἐπὶ τῶν ἄλλων πραγμάτων,
ἐν οἷς ἕκαστα τιμᾶται, μάλιστα παρὰ
τούτων αὐτὰ καὶ πρῶτον ηὑρῆσθαι· τῶν ἀγελαίων
ἔοικεν ἀνθρώπων εἶναι [206] τό γε ἐξ ἀρχῆς ὁ μύθος
εὕρημα, καὶ διαμένει ἐξ ἐκείνου μέχρι καὶ νῦν παρ᾽
αὐτοῖς πολιτευόμενον τὸ πρᾶγμα ὥσπερ ἄλλο τι
τῶν ἀκροαμάτων, αὐλὸς καὶ κιθάρα, τέρψεως
ἕνεκα καὶ ψυχαγωγίας. ὥσπερ γὰρ οἱ<note place='foot'>οἱ Cobet adds.</note> ὄρνιθες
ἵπτασθαι καὶ νεῖν οἱ<note place='foot'>οἱ Cobet adds.</note> ἰχθύες αἵ τε ἔλαφοι θεῖν
ἐπειδὴ πεφύκασιν οὐδὲν τοῦ διδαχθῆναι προσδέονται,
κἂν δήσῃ τις κἂν καθείρξῃ, πειρᾶται
ὅμως χρῆσθαι τούτοις τοῖς μορίοις, πρὸς ἃ σύνοιδεν
αὑτοῖς πεφυκόσι, ταυτὶ τὰ ζῷα, οὕτως οἶμαι
καὶ τὸ τῶν ἀνθρώπων [B] γένος οὐκ ἄλλο τι τὴν
ψυχὴν ἔχον ἢ λόγον καὶ ἐπιστήμην ὥσπερ ἐγκαθειργμένην,
ὃ δὴ καὶ λέγουσιν οἱ σοφοὶ δέναμιν,
ἐπὶ τὸ μανθάνειν τε<note place='foot'>τε Hertlein suggests, τι MSS.</note> καὶ ζητεῖν καὶ πολυπραγμονεῖν,
ὡς πρὸς οἰκειότατον ἑαυτῷ τῶν ἔργων,
τρέπεται· καὶ ὅτῳ μὲν εὐμενὴς θεὸς ταχέως ἔλυσε
τὰ δεσμὰ καὶ τὴν δύναμιν εἰς ἐνέργειαν ἤγαγε,
τούτῳ πάρεστιν εὐθὺς ἐπιστήμη, τοῖς δεδεμένοις
δὲ ἔτι, [C] καθάπερ οἶμαι Ἰξίων νεφέλῃ τινὶ<note place='foot'>Ἰξίων νεφέλῃ τινὶ Cobet, lacuna Hertlein, MSS.</note> ἀντὶ τῆς
θεοῦ λέγεται παραναπαύσασθαι, τούτοις ἀντ᾽
ἀληθοῦς ψευδὴς<note place='foot'>τούτοις ἀντ᾽ ἀληθοῦς ψευδὴς Cobet, lacuna Hertlein, MSS.,
ἐντέτηκε Wright, τέτηκε Hertlein, MSS.</note> ἐντέτηκε δόξα· γίνεται γὰρ
<pb n='078'/><anchor id='Pg078'/><anchor id='Pg079'/>
ἐντεῦθεν αὐτοῖς<note place='foot'>αὐτοῖς Wright, αὐτῷ Hertlein, MSS.</note> τὰ ὑπηνέμια καὶ τερατώδη ταυτὶ
τῆς ἀληθοῦς ἐπιστήμης οἷον εἴδωλα ἄττα καὶ
σκιαί· πράττουσι γοῦν πρὸ τῆς τῶν ἀληθῶν ἐπιστήμης
τὰ ψεύδη καὶ διδάσκουσί γε μάλα προθύμως
καὶ μανθάνουσιν ὥσπερ οἶμαι χρηστόν τι καὶ
θαυμαστόν. εἰ δ᾽ ὅλως χρή τι καὶ ὑπὲρ τῶν τοὺς
μύθους τὸ πρῶτον [D] πλασάντων ἀπολογήσασθαι,
δοκοῦσί μοι ταῖς τῶν παιδίων ψυχαῖς, ὥσπερ αἱ
τίτθαι περὶ τὰς ὀδοντοφυïας κνησιῶσιν αἰτοῖς
σκύτινα ἄττα προσαρτῶσι<note place='foot'>προσαρτῶσι Hertlein suggests, προσαρτᾶν MSS.</note> ταῖν χεροῖν, ἵνα αὐτῶν
παραμυθήσωνται τὸ πάθος, οὕτω δὲ καὶ οὗτοι τῷ
ψυχαρίῳ πτεροφυοῦντι καὶ ποθοῦντι πλέον εἰδέναι
τι, διδάσκεσθαι δὲ οὔπω τἀληθῆ δυναμένῳ ταῦτα
ἐποχετεύειν, ὥσπερ ἄρδοντες ἄρουραν διψῶσαν,
ἵνα δὴ οἶμαι αὐτῶν τὸν γαργαλισμὸν καὶ τὴν
ὀδύνην παραμυθήσωνται.
</p>

<p>
(Now one could no more discover where myth was
originally invented and who was the first to compose
fiction in a plausible manner for the benefit or
entertainment of his hearers, than if one were to try
to find out who was the first man that sneezed or the
first horse that neighed. But as cavalry arose in
Thrace and Thessaly<note place='foot'>Ἱππεῖς ἐν Θετταλίᾳ καὶ Θραᾴκῃ was a well-known proverb;
cf. <hi rend='italic'>Oration</hi> 2. 63 <hi rend='smallcaps'>c</hi>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>d</hi>.</note> and archers and the lighter
sort of weapons in India, Crete and Caria&mdash;since the
customs of the people were I suppose adapted to the
nature of the country,&mdash;just so we may assume about
other things as well, that where anything is highly
prized by a nation it was first discovered by that
nation rather than by any other. On this assumption
then it seems likely that myth was originally
the invention of men given to pastoral pursuits,
and from that day to this the making of myths is
still peculiarly cultivated by them, just as they first
invented instruments of music, the flute and the lyre,
for their pleasure and entertainment. For just as it
is the nature of birds to fly and of fish to swim and
of stags to run, and hence they need not be taught
to do so; and even if one bind or imprison these
animals they try none the less to use those special
parts of themselves for the purpose for which they
know they are naturally adapted; even so I think
the human race whose soul is no other than reason
and knowledge imprisoned so to speak in the body&mdash;the
philosophers call it a potentiality&mdash;even so I say
the human race inclines to learning, research and
study, as of all tasks most congenial to it. And when
a kindly god without delay looses a man's fetters
and brings that potentiality into activity, then on
the instant knowledge is his: whereas in those who
are still imprisoned false opinion instead of true is
implanted, just as, I think, Ixion is said to have
embraced a sort of cloud instead of the goddess.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> Hera; cf. Pindar, <hi rend='italic'>Pythian</hi> 2. 20 foll.; Dio Chrysostom
4. 130, Arnim.</note>
And hence they produce wind-eggs<note place='foot'>Cf. Plato, <hi rend='italic'>Theaetetus</hi> 151 <hi rend='smallcaps'>e</hi>.</note> and monstrous
births, mere phantoms and shadows so to speak
of true science. And thus instead of genuine
science they profess false doctrines, and are very
zealous in learning and teaching such doctrines,
as though forsooth they were something useful and
admirable. But if I am bound to say something in
defence of those who originally invented myths, I
think they wrote them for childish souls: and I
liken them to nurses who hand toys to the
hands of children when they are irritated by
teething, in order to ease their suffering: so those
mythologists wrote for the feeble soul whose wings
are just beginning to sprout, and who, though still
incapable of being taught the truth, is yearning for
further knowledge, and they poured in a stream of
myths like men who water a thirsty field, so as to
soothe their irritation and pangs.<note place='foot'>The whole passage echoes Plato, <hi rend='italic'>Phaedrus</hi> 251.</note>)
</p>

<p>
[207] Τοῦ δὲ τοιούτου προβαίνοντος καὶ παρὰ τοῖς
Ἕλλησιν εὐδοκιμοῦντος, εἵλκυσαν ἐντεῦθεν οἱ
ποιηταὶ τὸν αἶνον, ὃς τοῦ μύθου διαφέρει τῷ μὴ
πρὸς παῖδας, ἀλλὰ πρὸς ἄνδρας πεποιῆσθαι καὶ
μὴ ψυχαγωγίαν μόνον, ἀλλὰ καὶ παραίνεσιν ἔχειν
τινά. βούλεται γὰρ ἐπικρυπτόμενος παραινεῖν τε
καὶ διδάσκειν, ὅταν ὁ λέγων τὸ φανερῶς εἰπεῖν
εὐλαβῆται, [B] τὴν παρὰ τῶν ἀκουόντων ὑφορώμενος
ἀπέχθειαν. οὕτω τοι καὶ Ἡσίοδος αὐτὸ φαίνεται
πεποιηκώς· ὁ δὲ μετὰ τοῦτον Ἀρχίλοχος ὥσπερ
ἥδυσμά τι περιτιθεὶς τῇ ποιήσει, μύθοις οὐκ
ὀλιγάκις ἐχρήσατο ὁρῶν, ὡς εἰκός, τὴν μὲν ὑπόθεσιν,
<pb n='080'/><anchor id='Pg080'/><anchor id='Pg081'/>
ἣν μετῄει, τῆς τοιαύτης ψυχαγωγίας ἐνδεῶς
ἔχουσαν, σαφῶς δὲ ἐγνωκώς, ὅτι στερομένη μύθου
ποίησις ἐποποιΐα μόνον ἐστίν, ἐστέρηται δέ, ὡς ἂν
εἴποι τισ, ἑαυτῆς, οὐ γὰρ ἔτι λείπεται ποίησις,
ἡδύσματα ταῦτα παρὰ τῆς ποιητικῆς Μούσης
ἐδρέψατο, [C] καὶ παρέθηκέ γε αὐτοῦ τούτου χάριν,
ὅπως μὴ σιλλογράφος τις, ἀλλὰ ποιητὴς
νομισθείη.
</p>

<p>
(Then when the myth was gaining ground and
coming into favour in Greece, poets developed from
it the fable with a moral, which differs from the
myth in that the latter is addressed to children and
the former to men, and is designed not merely to
entertain them but conveys moral exhortation besides.
For the man who employs fable aims at moral exhortation
and instruction, though he conceals his aim and
takes care not to speak openly, for fear of alienating
his hearers. Hesiod, for instance, seems to have
written with this in view. And after him Archilochus
often employed myths,<note place='foot'>Cf. Archilochus <hi rend='italic'>frr.</hi> 86, 89; Archilochus used the beast-fable
or parable: Julian here ignores his own distinction and
uses the wider term <q>myth.</q> Hesiod used myth as well as
fable.</note> adorning and as it were
seasoning his poetry with them, probably because he
saw that his subject matter needed something of
this sort to make it attractive, and he well knew
that poetry without myth is merely versification<note place='foot'>Plato, <hi rend='italic'>Phaedo</hi> 61 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b</hi>.</note> and
lacks, one may say, its essential characteristic, and so
ceases to be poetry at all. Therefore he culled these
sweets from the Muse of Poetry and offered them to
his readers, in order that he might not be ranked
merely as a writer of satire but might be counted a
poet.)
</p>

<p>
Ὁ δὲ δὴ τῶν μύθων Ὅμηρος ἢ Θουκυδίδης ἢ
Πλάτων, ἢ ὅ, τι βούλει καλεῖν αὐτόν, Αἴσωπος ἦν
ὁ Σάμιος, δοῦλος τὴν τύχην<note place='foot'>τὴν τύχην Cobet, οὐ τὴν τύχην Hertlein, MSS.</note> μᾶλλον ἢ τὴν προαίρεσιν,
οὐκ ἄφρων μὴν<note place='foot'>μὴν Hertlein suggests, μὲν MSS.</note> οὐδὲ κατ᾽ αὐτὸ τοῦτο ἀνήρ.
ᾧ γὰρ ὁ νόμος οὐ μετεδίδου παρρησίας, τούτῳ
προσῆκον ἦν ἐσκιαγραφημένας τὰς συμβουλὰς
καὶ πεποικιλμένας ἡδονῇ καὶ χάριτι παραφέρειν,
ὥσπερ οἶμαι τῶν ἰατρῶν οἱ μὲν ἐλεύθεροι τὸ δέον
ἐπιτάττουσιν, [D] ἐὰν δὲ ἅμα τις οἰκέτης γένηται τὴν
τύχην καὶ τὴν τέχνην ἰατρός, πράγματα ἔχει
κολακεύειν ἅμα καὶ θεραπεύειν τὸν δεσπότην
ἀναγκαζόμενος. εἰ μὲν οὖν καὶ τῷ κυνὶ προσήκει
ταύτης τῆς δουλείας, λεγέτω, γραφέτω,
παραχωρείτω τῆς μυθολογίας αὐτῷ πᾶς ὁστισοῦν,
εἰ δὲ μόνος εἶναί φησιν ἐλεύθεροσ, ἐπὶ τί χρήσεται
τοῖς μύθοις, οὐκ οἶδα. πότερον ἵνα τὸ
πικρὸν καὶ δάκνον τῆς συμβουλῆς ἡδονῇ καὶ
χάριτι κεράσας [208] ἅμα τε ὀνήσῃ καὶ ἀποφύγῃ τὸ
προσλαβεῖν τι παρὰ τοῦ ὀνιναμένου κακόν; ἀλλὰ
τοῦτό ἐστι λίαν δουλοπρεπές. ἀλλ᾽ ἄμεινον ἄν
τις διδαχθείη μὴ τὰ πράγματα ἀκούων αὐτὰ μηδὲ
<pb n='082'/><anchor id='Pg082'/><anchor id='Pg083'/>
τὰ ἐπ᾽ αὐτοῖς ὀνόματα κατὰ τὸν κωμικὸν τὴν
σκάφην σκάφην λέγοντα; ἀλλ᾽ ἀντὶ τοῦ μὲν
δεῖνος τὸν Φαέθοντα τί<note place='foot'>τί δέον ὀνομάσαι; τί Reiske, δέον ὀνομάσαι, τὸν Hertlein
MSS.</note> δέον ἐνομάσαι; [B] τί δὲ
χραίνειν οὐκ εὐαγῶς τὴν ἐπωνυμίαν τοῦ βασιλέως
Ἠλίου; τίς δὲ ὁ Πὰν καὶ τίς ὁ Ζεὺς τῶν χαμαὶ
ἐρχομένων ἀνθρώπων ἄξιος καλεῖσθαι, ἵν᾽ ἐκεῖθεν
ἐπ᾽ αὐτοὺς μεταθῶμεν ἡμῶν τὰς διανοίας; καίτοι,
εἰ καὶ τοῦτο οἷόν τε ἦν, ἄμεινον ἦν αὐτοὺς ἐνομάσαι
τοὺς ἀνθρώπους. ἦ γὰρ οὐχ οὕτω κρεῖττον
ἦν εἰπεῖν ἀνθρωπικὰ θεμένους ὀνόματα; μᾶλλον
δὲ οὐδὲ θεμένους, [C] ἤρκει γὰρ ὅσαπερ ἡμῖν οἱ γονεῖς
ἔθεντο. ἀλλ᾽ εἰ μήτε μαθεῖν ἐστι ῥᾷον<note place='foot'>ῥᾷον Hertlein suggests, ῥᾴδιον MSS.</note> διὰ τοῦ
πλάσματος μήτε τῷ Κυνικῷ πρέπον πλάττειν τὰ
τοιαῦτα, τοῦ χάριν οὐκ ἐφεισάμεθα τοῦ πολυτελοῦς
ἀναλώματος, πρὸς δὲ δὴ καὶ ἐφθείραμεν τὸν
χρόνον πλάττοντες καὶ συντιθέντες μυθάρια, εἶτα
λογογραφοῦντες καὶ ἐκμανθάνοντες;
</p>

<p>
(But the Homer of myths, or their Thucydides, or
Plato, or whatever we must call him, was Aesop of
Samos, who was a slave by the accident of birth rather
than by temperament, and he proved his sagacity by
this very use of fable. For since the law did not
allow him freedom of speech, he had no resource but
to shadow forth his wise counsels and trick them out
with charms and graces and so serve them up to his
hearers. Just so, I think, physicians who are free-born
men prescribe what is necessary, but when a
man happens to be a slave by birth and a physician
by profession, he is forced to take pains to flatter and
cure his master at the same time. Now if our Cynic
also is subject to this sort of slavery, let him recite
myths, let him write them, and let everyone else
under the sun leave to him the <hi rend='italic'>rôle</hi> of mythologist.
But since he asserts that he alone is free, I do not
know what need he has of myths. Does he need to
temper the harshness and severity of his advice with
sweetness and charm, so that he may at once benefit
mankind and avoid being harmed by one whom he
has benefited? Nay, that is too much like a slave.
Moreover, would any man be better taught by not
hearing facts as they really are, or called by their
real names, like the comic poet who calls a spade a
spade?<note place='foot'>Literally a boat: a proverb; <hi rend='italic'>Anonym. Com. Gr. Frag.</hi>
199.</note> What need to speak of Phaethon instead of
So-and-so? What need sacrilegiously to profane the
title of King Helios? Who among men that walk
here below<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Iliad</hi> 5. 442; Hesiod, <hi rend='italic'>Theogony</hi> 272.</note> is worthy to be called Pan or Zeus, as
though we should ascribe to those gods our human
understanding? And yet if indeed this were possible
it would have been better to give the men their own
names. Would it not have been better to speak of
them thus and to bestow on them human names, or
rather not bestow, for those that our parents gave us
were enough? Well then if it is neither easier to
learn by means of fiction, nor appropriate for the
Cynic to invent that sort of thing at all, why did we
not spare that wasteful expense,<note place='foot'>An echo of Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Antonius</hi> 28: τὸ πολυτελέστατον,
ὡς Ἀντιφῶν εἶπεν, ἀνάλωμα, τὸν χρόνον.</note> and moreover why
did we waste our time in inventing and composing
trivial myths and then making stories of them and
learning them by heart?)
</p>

<p>
Ἀλλ᾽ ἴσως ὁ μὲν λόγος οὔ φησι δεῖν ἀντὶ τῶν
ἀληθῶν [D] καὶ μὴ πεπλασμένων τὰ ψευδῆ καὶ πεπλασμένα
παρὰ τοῦ κυνός, ᾧ μόνῳ τῆς ἐλευθερίας
μέτεστιν, ἐν τοῖς κοινοῖς ᾄδεσθαι συλλόγοις, ἡ
συνήθεια δὲ οὕτω<note place='foot'>οὕτω Hertlein suggests, αὐτῷ MSS.</note> γέγονεν ἀπὸ Διογένους ἀρξαμένη
καὶ Κράτητος ἄχρι τῶν ἐφεξῆς. οὐδὲν οὐδαμοῦ
παράδειγμα τοιοῦτον εὑρήσεις· ἐκεῖνο γὰρ ἀφίημι
τέως, ὅτι τῷ Κυνικῷ τὸ νόμισμα παραχαράττοντι
<pb n='084'/><anchor id='Pg084'/><anchor id='Pg085'/>
τῇ συνηθείᾳ προσέχειν οὐδαμῶς προσήκει, τῷ
λόγῳ δὲ αὐτῷ μόνῳ, [209] καὶ τὸ ποιητέον εὑρίσκειν
οἴκοθεν, ἀλλ᾽ οὐ μανθάνειν ἔξωθεν. εἰ δ᾽ Ἀντισθένης
ὁ Σωκρατικὸς ὥσπερ ὁ Ξενοφῶν ἔνια
διὰ τῶν μύθων ἀπήγελλε, μήτι<note place='foot'>μήτι Cobet μήτοι Hertlein, MSS.</note> τοῦτό σε ἐξαπατάτω·
καὶ γὰρ μικρὸν ὕστερον ὑπὲρ τούτου σοι
διαλέξομαι·<note place='foot'>διαλέξομαι Cobet, διηγήσομαι Spanheim, Hertlein, V
illegible.</note> νῦν δὲ ἐκεῖνό μοι πρὸς τῶν Μουσῶν
φράσον ὑπὲρ τοῦ Κυνισμοῦ, πότερον ἀπόνοια τίς
ἐστι καὶ βίος οὐκ ἀνθρώπινος, ἀλλὰ θηριώδης
ψυχῆς διάθεσις οὐδὲν καλόν, οὐδὲν σπουδαῖον
οὐδὲ ἀγαθὸν νομιζούσης; [B] δοίη γὰρ ἂν ὑπολαβεῖν
πολλοῖς περὶ αὐτοῦ ταῦτα Οἰνόμαος. εἴ τί
σοι τοῦ ταῦτα γοῦν ἐπελθεῖν ἐμέλησεν, ἐπέγνως
ἂν σαφῶς ἐν τῇ τοῦ κυνὸς αὐτοφωνίᾳ καὶ τῷ
κατὰ τῶν χρηστηρίων καὶ πᾶσιν ἁπλῶς οἷς
ἔγραψεν ὁ ἀνήρ. τοιούτου δὲ ὄντος τοῦ πράγματος,
ὥστε ἐνῃρῆσθαι μὲν ἅπασαν τὴν πρὸς τοὺς
θεοὺς εὐλάβειαν, ἠτιμάσθαι δὲ πᾶσαν ἀνθρωπίνην
φρόνησιν, νόμον δὲ μὴ τὸν ὁμώνυμον τῷ καλῷ καὶ
δικαίῳ πεπατῆσθαι μόνον, [C] ἀλλὰ καὶ τοὺς ἐκ τῶν
θεῶν ἡμῖν ὥσπερ ἐγγραφέντας ταῖς ψυχαῖς, ὑφ᾽
ὧν πάντες ἀδιδάκτως εἶναι θεῖόν τι πεπείσμεθα
καὶ πρὸς τοῦτο ἀφορᾶν ἐπ᾽ αὐτό τε οἶμαι σπεύδειν
οὕτω διατιθέμενοι τὰς ψυχὰς πρὸς αὐτὸ ὥσπερ,
οἶμαι πρὸς τὸ φῶς τὰ βλέποντα, πρὸς τούτῳ δὲ εἰ
καὶ ὁ δεύτερος ἐξελαύνοιτο νόμος ἱερὸς ὢν φύσει
καὶ θεῖος, ὁ τῶν ἀλλοτρίων πάντη καὶ πάντως
<pb n='086'/><anchor id='Pg086'/><anchor id='Pg087'/>
ἀπέχεσθαι κελεύων καὶ μήτε ἐν λόγῳ μήτε ἐν ἔργῳ
μήτε [D] ἐν αὐταῖς ταῖς λανθανούσαις τῆς ψυχῆς
ἐνεργείαις ταῦτα ἐπιτρέπων συγχεῖν, ὅσπερ ἡμῖν
καὶ τῆς τελειοτάτης ἐστὶν ἡγεμὼν δικαιοσύνης·
ἆρ᾽ οὐκ ἔστι βαράθρου τὸ πρᾶγμα ἄξιον; ἆρ᾽ οὐ
τοὺς ταῦτα ἐπαινοῦντας ὥσπερ τοὺς φαρμακοὺς
ἐχρῆν οὐ θύσθλοις παιομένους<note place='foot'>παιομένους Cobet, πολεμουμένους Hertlein, MSS.</note> ἐλαύνεσθαι·
κουφοτέρα γάρ ἐστι τῶν ἀδικημάτων ἡ ζημία·
λίθοις δὲ βαλλομένους ἀπολωλέναι; διαφέρουσι
γὰρ οὗτοι τί, [210] πρὸς τῶν θεῶν εἰπέ μοι, τῶν ἐπ᾽
ἐρημίας λῃστευόντων καὶ κατειληφότων τὰς
ἀκτὰς ἐπὶ τῷ λυμαίνεσθαι τοῖς καταπλέουσι;
καταφρονοῦντες θανάτου, φασίν· ὥσπερ οὐ
κἀκείνοις συνομαρτούσης ταυτησὶ τῆς ἀπονοίας.
φησὶ γοῦν ὁ καθ᾽ ὑμᾶς μὲν ποιητὴς καὶ μυθολόγος,
ὡς δὲ ὁ Πύθιος λῃσταῖς χρωμένοις ἀνεῖλεν, ἥρως
καὶ δαίμων, ὑπὲρ τῶν λῃζομένων τὴν θάλατταν
</p>

<p>
(But perhaps you will say that though reason
asserts that the Cynic, who alone of men can claim
to be free, ought not to invent and compose lying
fictions instead of the unvarnished truth and then
recite these in public assemblies, nevertheless the
custom began with Diogenes and Crates, and has been
maintained from that time by all Cynics. My answer
is that nowhere will you find a single example of
such a custom. For the moment I do not insist on
the fact that it in no wise becomes a Cynic who
must <q>give a new stamp to the common currency</q><note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Oration</hi> 6. 188 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a</hi>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>b</hi>.</note>
to pay any attention to custom, but only to pure
reason, and he ought to discover within himself
what is right for him to do and not learn it from
without. And do not be misled by the fact that
Antisthenes the disciple of Socrates, and Xenophon
too, sometimes expressed themselves by means of
myths; for I shall have something to say to you
on this point in a moment. But now in the
Muses' name answer me this question about the
Cynic philosophy. Are we to think it a sort of
madness, a method of life not suitable for a human
being, but rather a brutal attitude of mind which
recks naught of the beautiful, the honourable, or the
good? For Oenomaus<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Oration</hi> 6. 187 <hi rend='smallcaps'>c</hi>.</note> would make many people
hold this view of it. If you had taken any trouble to
study the subject, you would have learned this from
that Cynic's <q>Direct Inspiration of Oracles</q> and
his work <q>Against the Oracles,</q> in short from
everything that he wrote. This then is his aim, to
do away with all reverence for the gods, to bring
dishonour on all human wisdom, to trample on all
law that can be identified with honour and justice,
and more than this, to trample on those laws which
have been as it were engraved on our souls by the
gods, and have impelled us all to believe without
teaching that the divine exists, and to direct our
eyes to it and to yearn towards it: for our souls are
disposed towards it as eyes towards the light.
Furthermore, suppose that one should discard also
that second law which is sanctified both by nature
and by God, I mean the law that bids us keep our
hands altogether and utterly from the property of
others and permits us neither by word or deed
or in the inmost and secret activities of our souls
to confound such distinctions, since the law is our
guide to the most perfect justice&mdash;is not this conduct
worthy of pit?<note place='foot'>The pit or chasm at Athens into which the bodies of
criminals were thrown; cf. Xenophon, <hi rend='italic'>Hellenica</hi> 1. 7. 20.</note> And ought not those who
applauded such views to have been driven forth,
not by blows with wands, like scapegoats,<note place='foot'>For the ceremony of driving out the scapegoat see
Harrison, <hi rend='italic'>Prolegomena to Greek Religion</hi> 97; Frazer, <hi rend='italic'>Golden
Bough</hi>, Vol. 3, p. 93.</note> for that
penalty is too light for such crimes, but put to death
by stoning? For tell me, in Heaven's name, how
are such men less criminal than bandits who infest
lonely places and haunt the coasts in order to despoil
navigators? Because, as people say, they despise
death; as though bandits were not inspired by the
same frenzied courage! So says at any rate he<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> Homer.</note> who
with you counts as a poet and mythologist, though, as
a Pythian god proclaimed to certain bandits who
sought his oracle, he was a hero and divinity&mdash;I mean
where, speaking of pirates of the sea, he says:)
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<lg>
<l>Οἷά τε ληιστῆρες, ὑπεὶρ ἅλα τοί τ᾽ ἀλόωνται</l>
<l>[B] Ψυχὰς παρθέμενοι.</l>
</lg>

<p>
(<q>Like
pirates who wander over the sea, staking their lives.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Odyssey</hi> 3. 73.</note>)
</p>

</quote>

<p>
τί οὖν ἔτι ἕτερον ζητεῖς ὑπὲρ τῆς ἀπονοίας τῶν
λῃστῶν μάρτυρα; πλὴν εἰ μὴ καὶ ἀνδρειοτέρους
ἂν εἴποι τις τῶν τοιούτων κυνῶν ἐκείνους τοὺς
λῃστάς, ἰταμωτέρους δὲ τῶν λῃστῶν ἐκείνων τοὺς
κύνας τουτουσί. οἱ μὲν γὰρ συνειδότες αὑτοῖς
οὕτω μοχθηρὸν τὸν βίον οὐ μᾶλλον διὰ τὸ τοῦ
θανάτου δέος ἢ τὴν αἰσχύνην τὰς ἐρημίας προβάλλονται,
οἱ δ᾽ ἄρα περιπατοῦσιν<note place='foot'>ἄρα περιπατοῦσιν Hertlein suggests, ἀναστρέφονται καὶ
περιπατοῦσιν Cobet, ἀναπατοῦσιν MSS.</note> [C] ἐν τῷ μέσῳ
τὰ κοινὰ νόμιμα συγχέοντες, οὐχὶ τῷ κρείττονα
<pb n='088'/><anchor id='Pg088'/><anchor id='Pg089'/>
καὶ καθαρωτέραν, ἀλλὰ τῷ χείρονα καὶ βδελυρωτέραν
ἐπεισάγειν πολιτείαν.
</p>

<p>
(What better witness can you require for the desperate
courage of bandits? Except indeed that one might
say that bandits are more courageous than Cynics of
this sort, while the Cynics are more reckless than
they. For pirates, well aware as they are how
worthless is the life they lead, take cover in desert
places as much from shame as from the fear of death:
whereas the Cynics go up and down in our midst
subverting the institutions of society, and that not
by introducing a better and purer state of things
but a worse and more corrupt state.)
</p>

<p>
Τὰς ἀνανφερομένας δὲ εἰς τὸν Διογένη τραγῳδίας,
οὔσας μὲν καὶ ὁμολογουμένως<note place='foot'>ὁμολογουμένως Cobet, ὁμολογουμένας Hertlein, MSS.</note> Κυνικοῦ τινος
συγγράμματα, ἀμφισβητουμένας δὲ κατὰ τοῦτο
μόνον, [D] εἴτε τοῦ διδασκάλου, τοῦ Διογένους, εἰσίν,
εἴτε τοῦ μαθητοῦ Φιλίσκου, τίς οὐκ ἂν ἐπελθὼν
βδελύξαιτο καὶ νομίσειεν ὑπερβολὴν ἀρρητουργίας
οὐδὲ ταῖς ἑταίραις ἀπολελεῖφθαι; ταῖς
Οἰνομάου δὲ ἐντυχών· ἔγραψε γὰρ καὶ τραγῳδίας
τοῖς λόγοις τοῖς ἑαυτοῦ παραπλησίας, ἀρρήτων
ἀρρητότερα καὶ κακῶν πέρα, καὶ οὐκέθ᾽ ὅ,τι φῶ
περὶ αὐτῶν ἀξίως ἔχω, κἂν τὰ Μαγνήτων κακὰ,
κἂν τὸ Τερμέριον, κἂν πᾶσαν ἁπλῶς αὐτοῖς
ἐπιφθέγξωμαι [211] τὴν τραγῳδίαν μετὰ τοῦ σατύρου
καὶ τῆς κωμῳδίας καὶ τοῦ μίμου, οὕτω πᾶσα μὲν
αἰσχρότης, πᾶσα δὲ ἀπόνοια πρὸς ὑπερβολὴν ἐν
ἐκείναις τῷ ἀνδρὶ πεφιλοτέχνηται· καὶ εἰ μὲν
ἐκ τούτων τις ἀξιοῖ τὸν Κυνισμὸν ὁποῖός τις ἐστιν
ἡμῖν ἐπιδεῖξαι, βλασφημῶν τοὺς θεούς, ὑλακτῶν
πρὸς ἅπαντας, ὅπερ ἔφην ἀρχόμενος, ἴτω, χωρείτω,<note place='foot'>χωρείτω Hertlein suggests, χαιρέτω MSS.</note>
γῆν πρὸ γῆς, ὅποι βούλοιτο· εἰ δ᾽, ὅπερ ὁ
θεὸς ἔφη Διογένει, τὸ νόμισμα παραχαράξας ἐπὶ
τὴν πρὸ ταύτης εἰρημένην ὑπὸ τοῦ θεοῦ συμβουλὴν
τρέποιτο, τὸ Γνῶθι σαυτόν, ὅπερ ζηλώσαντες ἐπὶ
τῶν ἔργων Διογένης καὶ Κράτης φαίνονται, τοῦτο
ἤδη τοῦ παντὸς ἄξιον ἔγωγε φαίην ἂν ἀνδρὶ καιὶ
<pb n='090'/><anchor id='Pg090'/><anchor id='Pg091'/>
στρατηγεῖν καὶ φιλοσοφεῖν ἐθέλοντι. τί δὲ εἶπεν
ὁ θεός, ἆρ᾽ ἴσμεν; ὅτι τῆς τῶν πολλῶν αὐτῷ δόξης
ἐπέταξεν [C] ὑπερορᾶν καὶ παραχαράττειν οὐ τὴν
ἀλήθειαν, ἀλλὰ τὸ νόμισμα. τὸ δὲ Γνῶθι σαυτὸν
ἐν ποτέρᾳ θησόμεθα μοίρᾳ; πότερον ἐν τῇ τοῦ
νομίσματος; ἢ τοῦτό γε αὐτὸ τῆς ἀληθείας εἶναι
κεφάλαιον θήσομεν καὶ τρόπον εἰρῆσθαι τοῦ
Παραχάραξον τὸ νόμισμα διὰ τῆς<note place='foot'>τῆς Cobet, τῆς τοῦ Hertlein, MSS.</note> Γνῶθι σαυτὸν
ἀποφάσεως; ὥσπερ γὰρ ὁ τὰ νομιζόμενα παντάπασιν
ἀτιμάσας, ἐπ᾽ αὐτὴν δὲ ἥκων τὴν ἀλήθειαν
οὐδ᾽ ὑπὲρ ἑαυτοῦ τοῖς νομιζομένοις, ἀλλὰ τοῖς
ὄντως οὖσι θήσεται, [D] οὕτως οἶμαι καὶ ὁ γνοὺς
ἑαυτὸν ὅπερ ἔστιν ἀκριβῶς εἴσεται καὶ οὐχ ὅπερ
νομίζεται. πότερον οὖν οὐχ ὁ Πύθιος ἀληθής τέ
ἐστι θεός, καὶ Διογένης τοῦτο ἐπέπειστο σαφῶς,
ὅς γε αὐτῷ πεισθεὶς ἀντὶ φυγάδος ἀπεδείχθη οὐ
τοῦ Περσῶν βασιλέως μείζων, ἀλλ᾽, ὡς ἡ φήμη
παρέδωκεν, αὐτῷ τῷ καταλύσαντι τὸ Περσῶν
κράτος καὶ ταῖς Ἡρακλέους ἁμιλλωμένῳ πράξεσιν,
ὑπερβάλλεσθαι δὲ τὸν Ἀχιλλέα φιλοτιμουμένῳ
ζηλωτός; οὗτος οὖν ὁ Διογένης ὁποῖός τις ἦν τά
τε πρὸς τοὺς θεοὺς [212] καὶ τὰ πρὸς ἀνθρώπους μὴ διὰ
τῶν Οἰνομάου λόγων μηδὲ τῶν Φιλίσκου τραγῳδιῶν,
αἷς ἐπιγράψας τὸ Διογένους ὄνομα τῆς θείας
πολλά ποτε κατεψεύσατο κεφαλῆς, ἀλλὰ δι᾽ ὧν
ἔδρασεν ἔργων ὁποῖός τις ἦν γνωριζέσθω.
</p>

<p>
(Now as for the tragedies ascribed to Diogenes,
which are and are admitted to be, the composition of
some Cynic&mdash;the only point in dispute being whether
they are by the master himself, Diogenes, or by his
disciple Philiscus,&mdash;what reader of these would not
abhor them, and find in them an excess of infamy not
to be surpassed even by courtesans? However, let
him go on to read the tragedies of Oenomaus&mdash;for
he too wrote tragedies to match his discourses&mdash;and
he will find that they are more inconceivably infamous,
that they transgress the very limits of evil; in fact I
have no words to describe them adequately, and in
vain should I cite in comparison the horrors of
Magnesia,<note place='foot'>A proverb; cf. Archilochus <hi rend='italic'>fr.</hi> 27, Bergk.</note> the wickedness of Termerus<note place='foot'>A robber whom Theseus killed; Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Theseus</hi> 11.</note> or the whole
of tragedy put together, along with satiric drama,
comedy and the mime: with such art has their
author displayed in those works every conceivable
vileness and folly in their most extreme form.
Now if from such works any man chooses to demonstrate
to us the character of the Cynic philosophy,
and to blaspheme the gods and bark at all men, as I
said when I began, let him go, let him depart to the
uttermost parts of the earth whithersoever he
pleases. But if he do as the god enjoined on
Diogenes, and first <q>give a new stamp to the common
currency,</q> then devote himself to the advice
uttered earlier by the god, the precept <q>Know
Thyself,</q> which Diogenes and Crates evidently
followed in their actual practice, then I say that
this is wholly worthy of one who desires to be a
leader and a philosopher. For surely we know what
the god meant? He enjoined on Diogenes to
despise the opinion of the crowd and to give a new
stamp, not to truth, but to the common currency.
Now to which of these categories shall we assign
self-knowledge? Can we call it common currency?
Shall we not rather say that it is the very summary
of truth, and by the injunction <q>Know Thyself</q> we
are told the way in which we must <q>give a new
stamp to the common currency</q>? For just as one
who pays no regard whatever to conventional
opinions but goes straight for the truth will not
decide his own conduct by those opinions but by
actual facts, so I think he who knows himself will
know accurately, not the opinion of others about him,
but what he is in reality. It follows then, does it not?
that the Pythian god speaks the truth, and moreover
that Diogenes was clearly convinced of this since
he obeyed the god and so became, instead of an exile,
I will not say greater than the King of Persia, but
according to the tradition handed down actually
an object of envy to the man<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> Alexander.</note> who had broken the
power of Persia and was rivalling the exploits of
Heracles and ambitious to surpass Achilles. Then
let us judge of the attitude of Diogenes towards
gods and men, not from the discourses of Oenomaus
or the tragedies of Philiscus&mdash;who by ascribing
their authorship to Diogenes grossly slandered that
sacred personage&mdash;but let us, I say, judge him by
his deeds.)
</p>

<p>
Ἦλθεν εἰς Ὀλυμπίαν ἐπὶ τί πρὸς Διός; ἵνα τοὺς
ἀγωνιστὰς θεάσηται; τί δέ; οὐχὶ καὶ Ἰσθμίοις
<pb n='092'/><anchor id='Pg092'/><anchor id='Pg093'/>
τοὺς αὐτοὺς καὶ Παναθηναίοις θεάσασθαι δίχα
πραγμάτων οἷόν τε ἦν; ἀλλὰ ἐθέλων ἐκεῖ τοῖς
κρατίστοις συγγενέσθαι τῶν Ἑλλήνων; [B] οὐ γὰρ
Ἰσθμόνδε ἐφοίτων; οὐκ ἂν οὖν εὕροις ἄλλην αἰτίαν
ἢ τὴν εἰς τὸν θεὸν θεραπείαν. εἰ δ᾽ οὐκ ἐξεπλάγη
τὸν κεραυνὸν· οὐδὲ ἐγὼ μὰ τοὺς θεοὺς
πολλῶν πολλάκις πειραθεὶς διοσημιῶν ἐξεπλάγην.
ἀλλ᾽ ὅμως οὕτω δή τι τοὺς θεοὺς πέφρικα καὶ
φιλῶ καὶ σέβω καὶ ἅζομαι καὶ πάνθ᾽ ἁπλῶς τὰ
τοιαῦτα πρὸς αὐτοὺς πάσχω, ὅσαπερ ἄν τις καὶ
οἷα πρὸς ἀγαθοὺς δεσπότας, πρὸς διδασκάλους,
πρὸς πατέρας, πρὸς κηδεμόνας, πρὸς πάντα ἁπλῶς
τὰ τοιαῦτα, [C] ὥστε ὀλίγου δεῖν ὑπὸ τῶν σῶν ῥημάτων
πρῴην ἐξανέστην. τοῦτο μὲν οὖν οὐκ οἶδ᾽
ὅντινα τρόπον ἐπελθὸν ἴσως σιωπᾶσθαι δέον
ἐρρέθη.
</p>

<p>
(Why in the name of Zeus did he go to Olympia?
To see the athletes compete? Nay, could he not
have seen those very athletes without trouble both at
the Isthmian games and the Panathenaic festival?
Then was it because he wished to meet there the
most distinguished Greeks? But did they not go to
the Isthmus too? So you cannot discover any other
motive than that of doing honour to the god. He
was not, you say, awestruck by a thunderstorm. Ye
gods, I too have witnessed such signs from Zeus
over and over again, without being awestruck! Yet
for all that I feel awe of the gods, I love, I revere, I
venerate them, and in short have precisely the same
feelings towards them as one would have towards
kind masters<note place='foot'>Plato, <hi rend='italic'>Phaedo</hi> 63 <hi rend='smallcaps'>c</hi>.</note> or teachers or fathers or guardians or
any beings of that sort. That is the very reason why
I could hardly sit still the other day and listen to
your speech. However, I have spoken thus as I was
somehow or other impelled to speak, though perhaps
it would have been better to say nothing at all.)
</p>

<p>
Διογένης δὲ καὶ πένης ὢν καὶ χρημάτων ἐνδεὴς
εἰς Ὀλυμπίαν ἐβάδιζεν, Ἀλέξανδρον δὲ ἥκειν
ἐκέλευε παρ᾽ ἑαυτόν, εἴ τῳ πιστὸς ὁ Δίων. οὕτω
πρέπειν ἐνόμιζεν ἑαυτῷ [D] μὲν φοιτᾶν ἐπὶ τὰ ἱερὰ
τῶν θεῶν, τῷ βασιλικωτάτῳ δὲ τῶν καθ᾽ ἑαυτὸν
ἐπὶ τὴν ἑαυτοῦ συνουσίαν. ἃ δὲ πρὸς Ἀρχίδαμον
γέγραφεν, οὐ βασιλικαὶ παραινέσεις εἰσίν; οὐ
μόνον δὲ ἐν τοῖς λόγοις ἦν ὁ Διογένης θεοσεβής,
ἀλλὰ γὰρ καὶ ἐν τοῖς ἔργοις. ἑλόμενον γὰρ αὐτὸν
οἰκεῖν τὰς Ἀθήνας ἐπειδὴ τὸ δαιμόνιον εἰς τὴν
Κόρινθον ἀπήγαγεν, ἀφεθεὶς ὑπὸ τοῦ πριαμένου
τὴν πόλιν οὐκέτ᾽ ῴήθη δεῖν ἐκλιπεῖν· [213] ἐπέπειστο
γὰρ αὑτοῦ τοῖς θεοῖς μέλειν εἴς τε τὴν Κόρινθον οὐ
<pb n='094'/><anchor id='Pg094'/><anchor id='Pg095'/>
μάτην οὐδὲ κατά τινα συντυχίαν, τρόπον δέ τινα
ὑπὸ τῶν θεῶν εἰσπεπέμφθαι ὁρῶν τὴν πόλιν
τρυφῶσαν τῶν Ἀθηναίων μᾶλλον καὶ δεομένην
μείζονος καὶ γενναιοτέρου σωφρονιστοῦ.
</p>

<p>
(To return to Diogenes: he was poor and lacked
means, yet he travelled to Olympia, though he bade
Alexander come to him, if we are to believe Dio.<note place='foot'>Dio Chrysostom, <hi rend='italic'>Oration</hi> 4. 12, Arnim.</note>
So convinced was he that it was his duty to visit the
temples of the gods, but that it was the duty of the
most royal monarch of that day to come to him for
an interview. And was not that royal advice which
he wrote to Archidamus? Nay, not only in words
but in deeds also did Diogenes show his reverence
for the gods. For he preferred to live in Athens,
but when the divine command had sent him away to
Corinth, even after he had been set free by the man
who had bought him, he did not think he ought to
leave that city. For he believed that the gods took
care of him, and that he had been sent to Corinth,
not at random or by some accident, but by the gods
themselves for some purpose. He saw that Corinth
was more luxurious than Athens, and stood in need
of a more severe and courageous reformer.)
</p>

<p>
Τί δέ; οὐχὶ καὶ τοῦ Κράτητος μουσικὰ καὶ
χαρίεντα φέρεται πολλὰ δείγματα τῆς πρὸς τοὺς
θεοὺς ὁσιότητός τε καὶ εὐλαβείας; ἄκουε γοῦν
αὐτὰ παρ᾽ ἡμῶν, [B] εἴ σοι μὴ σχολὴ γέγονε μαθεῖν
ἐξ ἐκείνων αὐτά.
</p>

<p>
To give you another instance: Are there not
extant many charming poems by Crates also which
are proofs of his piety and veneration for the gods?
I will repeat them to you if you have not had time
to learn this from the poems themselves:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<lg>
<l>Μνημοσύνης καὶ Ζηνὸς Ὀλυμπίου ἀγλαὰ τέκνα,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Μοῦσαι Πιερέδες, κλῦτέ μοι εὐχομένῳ·</l>
<l>Χόρτον ἐμῇ συνεχῆ δότε γαστέρι, καὶ δότε χωρίς</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Δουλοσύνης, ἣ δὴ λιτὸν ἔθηκε βίον.</l>
</lg>

<p>
(<q rend='pre'>Ye Muses of Pieria, glorious children of Memory
and Olympian Zeus, grant me this prayer! Give me
food for my belly from day to day, but give it without
slavery which makes life miserable indeed....</q>)
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Ὠφέλιμον δὲ φίλοις, μὴ γλυκερὸν τίθετε.</l>
<l>[C] Χρήματα δ᾽ οὐκ ἐθέλω συνάγειν κλυτά, κανθάρου ὄλβον</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Μύρμηκός τ᾽ ἄφενος χρήματα μαιόμενος,</l>
<l>Ἀλλὰ δικαιοσύνης μετέχειν καὶ πλοῦτον ἀγείρειν<note place='foot'>ἀγείρειν Cobet, ἀσινῆ Hertlein, MSS.</note></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Εὔφορον, εὔκτητον, τίμιον εἰς ἀρετήν.</l>
<l>Τῶν δὲ τυχὼν Ἑρμῆν καὶ Μούσας ἱλάσομ᾽ ἁγνάς.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Οὐ δαπάναις τρυφεραῖς, [D] ἀλλ᾽ ἀρεταῖς ὁσίαις.</l>
</lg>

<p>
(<q>Make me useful rather than agreeable to
my friends. Treasure and the fame thereof I desire
not to amass; nor do I crave the wealth of the
beetle and the substance of the ant. But justice I
desire to attain, and to collect riches that are easily
carried, easily acquired, precious for virtue. If I
attain these things I will worship Hermes and the
holy Muses, not with costly and luxurious offerings,
but with pious and virtuous actions.</q><note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Oration</hi> 6. 199 <hi rend='smallcaps'>d</hi>.</note>)
</p>

</quote>

<p>
ὁρᾷς ὅτι τοὺς θεοὺς εὐφημῶν, οὐχὶ δὲ ὡς σὺ βλασφημῶν
κατ᾽ αὐτῶν ηὔχετο; πόσαι γὰρ ἑκατόμβαι
τῆς ὁσίας εἰσὶν ἀντάξιαι, ἣν καὶ ὁ δαιμόνιος Εὐριπίδης
ὀρθῶς ἥμνησεν εἰπὼν
</p>

<p>
(You see that, far from blaspheming the gods as
you do, he adored and prayed to them? For what
number of hecatombs are worth as much as Piety,
whom the inspired Euripides celebrated appropriately
in the verses)</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<lg>
<l>Ὁσία πότνα θεῶν, ὁσία;</l>
</lg>

<p>
(<q>Piety, queen of the gods, Piety</q>?<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Bacchae</hi> 370.</note>)
</p>

</quote>

<pb n='096'/><anchor id='Pg096'/><anchor id='Pg097'/>

<p>
ἢ τοῦτό σε λέληθεν, ὅτι πάντα, καὶ τὰ μεγάλα
καὶ τὰ σμικρά, μετὰ τῆς ὁσίας τοῖς θεοῖς προσαγόμενα
τὴν ἴσην ἔχει δύναμιν, ἐστερημένη δὲ τῆς
ὁσίας οὐχ ἑκατόμβη μὰ θεούς, ἀλλὰ ἡ τῆς Ὀλυμπιάδος
χιλιόμβη ἀνάλωμα μόνον ἐστίν, [214] ἄλλο δὲ
οὐδέν; ὅπερ οἶμαι γιγνώσκων ὁ Κράτης αὐτός τε
διὰ μόνης ἧς εἶχεν ὁσίας τοὺς θεοὺς ἐτίμα σὺν
εὐφημίᾳ καὶ τοὺς ἄλλους ἐδίδασκε μὴ τὰ δαπανήματα
τῆς ὁσίας, ἀλλὰ τὴν ὁσίαν ἐκείνων προτιμᾶν
ἐν ταῖς ἁγιστείαις. τοιούτω δὲ τὼ ἄνδρε τώδε
γενομένω τὰ πρὸς τοὺς θεοὺς οὐκ ἀκροατήρια
συνεκροτείτην<note place='foot'>συνεκροτείτην Cobet, Hertlein approves, συνεκροτεῖτον
MSS.</note> οὐδ᾽ ὥσπερ οἱ σοφοὶ δι᾽ εἰκόνων
καὶ μύθων τοῖς φίλοις συνεγιγνέσθην·<note place='foot'>συνεγιγνέσθην Cobet, Hertlein approves, συνεγέγνεσθον
MSS.</note> λέγεται
γὰρ [B] ὑπ᾽ Εὐριπίδου καλῶς
</p>

<p>
(Or are you not aware that all offerings whether great
or small that are brought to the gods with piety
have equal value, whereas without piety, I will not
say hecatombs, but, by the gods, even the Olympian
sacrifice<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> in honour of Olympian Zeus.</note> of a thousand oxen is merely empty expenditure
and nothing else?<note place='foot'>Cf. Themistius 182 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a</hi>.</note> This I believe Crates
recognized, and so with that piety which was his
only possession he himself used to honour the gods
with praises, and moreover taught others not to
honour expensive offerings more than piety in the
sacred ceremonies. This then was the attitude of
both those Cynics towards the gods but they did
not crowd audiences together to hear them, nor did
they entertain their friends with similes and myths,
like the wise men of to-day. For as Euripides well
says,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Phoenissae</hi> 472.</note>)
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<lg>
<l>Ἁπλοῦς ὁ μῦθος τῆς ἀληθείας ἔφυ·</l>
</lg>

<p>
(<q>Simple and unadorned is the language of
truth.</q>)
</p>

</quote>

<p>
σκιαγραφίας γάρ φησι τὸν ψευδῆ καὶ ἄδικον δεῖσθαι.
τίς οὖν ὁ τρόπος αὐτοῖς τῆς συνουσίας ἐγίνετο;
τῶν λόγων ἡγεῖτο τὰ ἔργα, καὶ οἱ τὴν
πενίαν τιμῶντες αὐτοὶ πρῶτοι φαίνονται<note place='foot'>φαίνονται Hertlein suggests, ἐφαίνοντο MSS.</note> καὶ τῶν
πατρῴων χρημάτων ὑπεριδόντες, οἱ τὴν ἀτυφίαν
ἀσπασάμενοι πρῶτοι [C] τὴν εὐτέλειαν ἤσκουν διὰ
πάντων, οἱ τὸ τραγικὸν καὶ σοβαρὸν ἐκ τῶν
ἀλλοτρίων ἐξαιροῦντες βίων ᾤκουν αὐτοὶ πρῶτοι
τὰς ἀγορὰς ἢ τὰ τῶν θεῶν τεμένη, τῇ τρυφῇ δὲ
καὶ πρὸ τῶν ῥημάτων διὰ τῶν ἔργων ἐπολέμουν,
ἔργοις ἐλέγχοντες, οὐ λόγῳ βοῶντες, ὅτι τῷ Διὶ
συμβασιλεύειν ἔξεστιν οὐδενὸς ἢ σμικρῶν πάνυ
<pb n='098'/><anchor id='Pg098'/><anchor id='Pg099'/>
δεόμενον οὐδὲ παρενοχλούμενον ὑπὸ τοῦ σώματος,
ἐπετίμων δὲ τοῖς ἁμαρτάνουσιν, ἡνίκα ἔζων οἱ
πταίσαντες, [D] οὐκ ἀποθανόντας ἐβλασφήμουν, ἡνίκα
καὶ τῶν ἐχθρῶν οἱ μετριώτεροι σπένδονται τοῖς
ἀπελθοῦσιν. ἔχει δὲ ὅ γε ἀληθινὸς κύων
ἐχθρὸν οὐδένα, κἂν τὸ σωμάτιον αὐτοῦ τις
πατάξῃ, κἂν τοὔνομα περιέλκῃ, κἂν λοιδορῆται
καὶ βλασφημῇ, διότι τὸ μὲν τῆς ἔχθρας γίνεται
πρὸς ἀντίπαλον, τὸ δὲ ὑπερβαῖνον τὴν πρὸς
ἕτερον ἅμιλλαν εὐνοίᾳ τιμᾶσθαι φιλεῖ· [215] κἄν τις
ἑτέρως ἔχῃ πρὸς αὐτὸν, καθάπερ οἶμαι πολλοὶ
πρὸς τοὺς θεούς, ἐκείνῳ μὲν οὐκ ἔστιν ἐχθρός, οὐδὲ
γὰρ βλαβερός, αὐτὸς δὲ αὑτῷ βαρύτατον ἐπιτιθεὶς<note place='foot'>ἐπιτιθεὶς Hertlein suggests, ἐπιθεὶς MSS.</note>
τίμημα τὴν τοῦ κρείττονος ἄγνοιαν ἔρημος λείπεται
τῆς ἐκείνου προστασίας.
</p>

<p>
(Only the liar and the dishonest man, he
says, have any use for a mysterious and allusive style.
Now what was the manner of their intercourse with
men? Deeds with them came before words, and
if they honoured poverty they themselves seem
first to have scorned inherited wealth; if they
cultivated modesty, they themselves first practised
plain living in every respect; if they tried to
expel from the lives of other men the element of
theatrical display and arrogance, they themselves
first set the example by living in the open market
places and the temple precincts, and they opposed
luxury by their own practice before they did so in
words; nor did they shout aloud but proved by their
actions that a man may rule as the equal of Zeus
if he needs nothing or very little and so is not
hampered by his body; and they reproved sinners
during the lifetime of those who had offended but
did not speak ill of the dead; for when men are
dead even their enemies, at least the more moderate,
make peace with the departed. But the genuine
Cynic has no enemy, even though men strike his
feeble body or drag his name in the mire, or slander
and speak ill of him, because enmity is felt only
towards an opponent, but that which is above personal
rivalry is usually loved and respected. But if anyone
is hostile to a Cynic, as indeed many are even to the
gods, he is not that Cynic's enemy, since he cannot
injure him; rather he inflicts on himself the most
terrible punishment of all, namely ignorance of one
who is nobler than himself; and so he is deserted
and bereft of the other's protection.)
</p>

<p>
Ἀλλ᾽ εἰ μὲν νῦν μοι προύκειτο περὶ Κυνισμοῦ
γράφειν, [B] εἶπον ἂν ὑπὲρ τούτων ἔτι τὰ παριστάμενά
μοι τῶν εἰρημένων ἴσως οὐκ ἐλάττω· νῦν δὲ ἀποδιδόντες
τὸ συνεχὲς τῇ προαιρέσει περὶ τοῦ ποταποὺς
εἶναι χρὴ τοὺς πλαττομένους τῶν μύθων
ἐφεξῆς σκοπῶμεν. ἴσως δὲ ἡγεῖται καὶ ταύτης
τῆς ἐγχειρήσεως ἐκείνη, ὁποίᾳ τινὶ φιλοσοφίᾳ
προσῆκον ἡ μυθογραφία. φαίνονται γὰρ πολλοὶ
καὶ τῶν φιλοσόφων αὐτὸ καὶ τῶν θεολόγων ποιήσαντες,
ὥσπερ Ὀρφεὺς μὲν ὁ παλαιότατος ἐνθέως
φιλοσοφήσας, οὐκ ὀλίγοι δὲ καὶ τῶν μετ᾽ ἐκεῖνον·
οὐ μὴν ἀλλὰ [C] καὶ Ξενοφῶν φαίνεται καὶ Ἀντισθένης
καὶ Πλάτων προσχρησάμενοι πολλαχοῦ τοῖς
μύθοις, ὥσθ᾽ ἡμῖν πέφηνεν, εἰ καὶ μὴ τῷ Κυνικῷ,
φιλοσόφῳ γοῦν τινι προσήκειν ἡ μυθογραφία.
</p>

<p>
(Now if my present task were to write about the
Cynic philosophy, I could add many details about
the Cynics, not less important than what I have said
already. But not to interrupt my main theme, I
will now consider in due course the question what
kind of myths ought to be invented. But perhaps
another inquiry should precede this attempt, I mean
to what branch of philosophy the composition of
myths is appropriate. For we see that many
philosophers and theologians too have employed it,
Orpheus for instance, the most ancient of all the
inspired philosophers, and many besides of those that
came after him. Nay what is more, Xenophon as
we know and Antisthenes and Plato often introduced
myths, so that it is obvious that even if the use of
myth be not appropriate for the Cynic, still it may be
so for some other type of philosopher.)
</p>

<pb n='100'/><anchor id='Pg100'/><anchor id='Pg101'/>

<p>
Μικρὰ οὖν ὑπὲρ τῶν τῆς φιλοσοφίας εἴτε
μορίων εἴτε ἐργάνων προρρητέον.<note place='foot'>προρρητέον Reiske, lacuna Hertlein, MSS.</note> ἔστι γὰρ οὐ
μέγα τὸ διαφέρον ὁποτέρως ἄν τις τῷ πρακτικῷ<note place='foot'>τῷ πρακτικῷ Hertlein suggests, τῷ τε ἠθικῷ MSS.</note>
[D] καὶ τῷ φυσικῷ τὸ λογικὸν προσαριθμῇ· ἀναγκαῖον
γὰρ ὁμοίως φαίνεται κατ᾽ ἀμφότερα. τριῶν
δὴ τούτων αὖθις ἕκαστον εἰς τρία τέμνεται, τὸ μὲν
φυσικὸν εἰς τὸ θεολογικὸν καὶ τὸ περὶ τὰ μαθήματα
καὶ τρίτον τὸ περὶ τὴν τῶν γινομένων καὶ
ἀπολλυμένων καὶ τῶν ἀιδίων μέν, σωμάτων δὲ
ὅμως θεωρίαν, τί τὸ εἶναι αὐτοῖς καὶ τίς ἡ οὐσία
ἑκάστου· τοῦ πρακτικοῦ δὲ τὸ μὲν πρὸς ἕνα
ἄνδρα, ἠθικόν, οἰκονομικὸν δὲ τὸ περὶ μίαν οἰκίαν,
πολιτικὸν δὲ τὸ περὶ πόλιν· ἔτι μέντοι τοῦ
λογικοῦ τὸ μὲν ἀποδεικτικὸν διὰ τῶν ἀληθῶν, τὸ
δὲ διὰ τῶν ἐνδόξων βιαστικόν, [216] τὸ δὲ διὰ τῶν
φαινομένων ἐνδόξων παραλογιστικόν. ὄντων δὴ
τοσούτων τῶν τῆς φιλοσοφίας μερῶν, εἰ μή τί με
λέληθε· καὶ οὐδὲν θαυμαστὸν ἄνδρα στρατιώτην
μὴ λίαν ἐξακριβοῦν μηδ᾽ ἐξονυχίζειν τὰ τοιαῦτα,
ἅτε οὐκ ἐκ βιβλίων ἀσκήσεως, ἀπὸ δὲ τῆς προστυχούσης
αὐτὰ ἕξεως ἀποφθεγγόμενον· ἔσεσθε
γοῦν μοι καὶ ὑμεῖς μάρτυρες, εἰ τὰς ἡμέρας λογίσαισθε,<note place='foot'>λογίσαισθε Cobet, λογίσεσθε Hertlein, MSS.</note>
πόσαι τινές εἰσιν αἱ μεταξὺ ταύτης τε καὶ
τῆς ἔναγχος ἡμῖν γενομένης ἀκροάσεως ὅσων τε
ἡμῖν ἀσχολιῶν πλήρεις· [B] ἀλλ᾽ ὅπερ ἔφην, εἰ καί
τι παραλέλειπται παρ᾽ ἐμοῦ· καίτοι νομίζω γε
μηδὲν ἐνδεῖν· πλὴν ὁ προστιθεὶς οὐκ ἐχθρός,
ἀλλὰ φίλος ἔσται.
</p>

<p>
(I must first then say a few words about the subdivisions
or instruments of philosophy. It does not
make much difference in which of two ways one
reckons logic, whether with practical or natural philosophy,
since it is equally necessary to both these
branches. But I will consider these as three separate
branches and assign to each one three subdivisions.
Natural philosophy consists of theology, mathematics,
and thirdly the study of this world of generation and
decay and things that though imperishable are nevertheless
matter, and deals with their essential nature
and their substance in each case. Practical philosophy
again consists of ethics in so far as it deals with the
individual man, economics when it deals with the
household as a unit, politics when it deals with the
state. Logic, again, is demonstrative in so far as it
deals with the truth of principles; polemic when it
deals with general opinions; eristic when it deals
with opinions that only seem probabilities. These
then are the divisions of philosophy, if I mistake not.
Though indeed it would not be surprising that a
mere soldier should be none too exact in these
matters or not have them at his fingers' ends, seeing
that I speak less from book-knowledge than from
observation and experience. For that matter you
can yourselves bear me witness thereto, if you count
up how few days have elapsed between the lecture
that we lately heard and to-day, and moreover the
number of affairs with which they have been filled
for me. But as I said if I have omitted anything&mdash;though
I do not think I have&mdash;still if anyone can
make my classification more complete he will be <q>no
enemy but my friend.</q><note place='foot'>Plato, <hi rend='italic'>Timaeus</hi> 54 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a</hi>.</note>)
</p>

<pb n='102'/><anchor id='Pg102'/><anchor id='Pg103'/>

<p>
Τούτων δὴ τῶν μερῶν οὔτε τῷ λογικῷ
προσήκει τῆς μυθογραφίας οὔτε τοῦ φυσικοῦ<note place='foot'>τοῦ φυσικοῦ τῷ Hertlein suggests, τῷ φυσικῷ οὔτε MSS.</note>
τῷ μαθηματικῷ, μόνον δέ, εἴπερ ἄρα, τοῦ
πρακτικοῦ τῷ πρὸς ἕνα γινομένῳ καὶ τοῦ θεολογικοῦ
τῷ τελεστικῷ καὶ μυστικῷ· [C] φιλεῖ γὰρ
ἡ φύσις κρύπτεσθαι, καὶ τὸ ἀποκεκρυμμένον
τῆς τῶν θεῶν οὐσίας οὐκ ἀνέχεται γυμνοῖς εἰς
ἀκαθάρτους ἀκοὰς ῥίπτεσθαι ῥήμασιν. ὅπερ δὲ
δὴ τῶν χαρακτήρων ἡ ἀπόρρητος φύσις ὠφελεῖν
πέφυκε καὶ ἀγνοουμένη· θεραπεύει γοῦν οὐ ψυχὰς
μόνον, ἀλλὰ καὶ σώματα, καὶ θεῶν ποιεῖ παρουσίας·
τοῦτ᾽ οἶμαι πολλάκις γίγνεσθαι καὶ διὰ
τῶν μύθων, [D] ὅταν εἰς τὰς τῶν πολλῶν ἀκοὰς οὐ
δυναμένας τὰ θεῖα καθαρῶς δέξασθαι δι᾽ αἰνιγμάτων
αὐτοῖς μετὰ τῆς μύθων σκηνοποιίας
ἐγχέηται.
</p>

<p>
(Now of these branches of philosophy, logic has no
concern with the composition of myths; nor has
mathematics, the sub-division of natural philosophy;
but they may be employed, if at all, by that department
of practical philosophy which deals with the
individual man, and by that department of theology
which has to do with initiation and the Mysteries.
For nature loves to hide her secrets,<note place='foot'>Heracleitus <hi rend='italic'>fr.</hi> 123, Diels; cf. Themistius 69 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b</hi>.</note> and she does
not suffer the hidden truth about the essential
nature of the gods to be flung in naked words to the
ears of the profane. Now there are certain characteristics
of ours that derive benefit from that occult
and unknown nature, which nourishes not our souls
alone but our bodies also, and brings us into the
presence of the gods, and this I think often comes
about by means of myths; when through riddles and
the dramatic setting of myths that knowledge is
insinuated into the ears of the multitude who
cannot receive divine truths in their purest form.)
</p>

<p>
Φανεροῦ δὲ ἤδη γενομένου τίνι καὶ ποίῳ
φιλοσοφίας εἴδει καὶ μυθογραφεῖν ἔσθ᾽ ὅτε προσήκει·
πρὸς γὰρ τῷ λόγῳ μαρτυρεῖ τούτοις ἡ τῶν
προλαβόντων ἀνδρῶν προαίρεσις. ἐπεὶ καὶ Πλάτωνι
πολλὰ μεμυθολόγηται περὶ τῶν ἐν ᾅδου
πραγμάτων θεολογοῦντι καὶ πρό γε τούτου τῷ
τῆς Καλλιόπης, [217] Ἀντισθένει δὲ καὶ Ξενοφῶντι
καὶ αὐτῷ Πλάτωνι πραγματευομένοις ἠθικάς
τινας ὑποθέσεις οὐ παρέργως, ἀλλὰ μετά τινος
ἐμμελείας ἡ τῶν μύθων ἐγκαταμέμικται γραφή,
οὓς σ᾽<note place='foot'>σ᾽ ἐχρῆν Hertlein suggests, ἐχρῆν MSS.</note> ἐχρῆν, εἴπερ ἐβούλου, μιμούμενον ἀντὶ
μὲν Ἡρακλέους μεταλαμβάνειν Περσέως ἢ Θησέως
<pb n='104'/><anchor id='Pg104'/><anchor id='Pg105'/>
τινὸς ὄνομα καὶ τὸν Ἀντισθένειον τύπον ἐγχαράττειν,
ἁντὶ δὲ τῆς Προδίκου σκηνοποιιας ἀμφὶ τοῖν
ἀμφοῖν [B] τούτοιν θεοῖν ἑτέραν ὁμοίαν εἰσάγειν εἰς
τὸ θέατρον.
</p>

<p>
(It is now evident what branch and what sort of
philosophy may properly on occasion employ myths.
And to support my argument I call to witness the
authority of those philosophers who were the first to
use myths. Plato for instance in his theological
descriptions of life in Hades often uses myths, and
the son<note place='foot'>Orpheus.</note> of Calliope before him. And when Antisthenes
and Xenophon and Plato himself discuss
certain ethical theories they use myths as one of the
ingredients, and not casually but of set purpose.
Now if you too wished to use myths you ought
to have imitated these philosophers, and instead of
Heracles you should have introduced the name of
Perseus or Theseus, let us say, and have written in
the style of Antisthenes; and in place of the
dramatic setting used by Prodicus,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> in his allegory the Choice of Heracles; Xenophon,
<hi rend='italic'>Memorabilia</hi> 2. 1. 2; Julian, <hi rend='italic'>Oration</hi> 2. 56 <hi rend='smallcaps'>d</hi>.</note> in treating
of those two gods<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> Pan and Zeus; cf. 208 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b</hi>.</note> you should have introduced into
your theatre another setting of the same sort.)
</p>

<p>
Ἐπεὶ δὲ καὶ τῶν τελεστικῶν μύθων ἐπεμνήσθην,
φέρε νῦν ὁποίους εἶναι χρὴ τοὺς ἑκατέρῳ
τῶν μερῶν ἁρμόττοντας αὐτοὶ καθ᾽ ἑαυτοὺς ἰδεῖν
πειραθῶμεν, οὐκέτι μαρτύρων παλαιῶν ἐν πᾶσι
προσδεόμενοι, ἑπόμενοι δὲ νέοις ἴχνεσιν ἀνδρός, ὃν
ἐγὼ μετὰ τοὺς θεοὺς ἐξ ἴσης Ἀριστοτέλει καὶ
Πλάτωνι ἄγαμαί τε τέθηπά τε. [C] φησὶ δὲ οὐχ
ὑπὲρ πάντων οὗτος, ἀλλ᾽ ὑπὲρ τῶν τελεστικῶν,
οὓς παρέδωκεν ἡμῖν Ὀρφεὺς ὁ τὰς ἁγιωτάτας
τελετὰς καταστησάμενος. τὸ γὰρ ἐν τοῖς μύθοις
ἀπεμφαῖνον αὐτῷ τούτῳ προοδοποιεῖ πρὸς τὴν
ἀλήθειαν. ὅσῳ γὰρ μᾶλλον παράδοξόν ἐστι καὶ
τερατῶδες τὸ αἴνιγμα, τοσούτῳ μᾶλλον ἔοικε
διαμαρτύρεσθαι, μὴ τοῖς αὐτόθεν λεγομένοις
πιστεύειν, ἀλλὰ τὰ λεληθότα περιεργάζεσθαι καὶ
μὴ πρότερον ἀφίστασθαι, [D] πρὶν ἂν ὑπὸ θεοῖς ἡγεμόσιν
ἐκφανῆ γενόμενα τὸν ἐν ἡμῖν τελέσῃ, μᾶλλον
δὲ τελειώσῃ νοῦν καὶ εἰ δή τι κρεῖττον ἡμῖν
ὑπάρχει τοῦ νοῦ, αὐτοῦ τοῦ ἑνὸς καὶ τἀγαθοῦ μοῖρά
τις ὀλίγη τὸ πᾶν ἀμερίστως ἔχουσα, τῆς ψυχῆς
πλήρωμα καὶ ἐν τῷ ἑνὶ καὶ ἀγαθῷ συνέχουσα
<pb n='106'/><anchor id='Pg106'/><anchor id='Pg107'/>
πᾶσαν αὐτὴν διὰ τῆς ὑπερεχούσης καὶ χωριστῆς
αὐτοῦ καὶ ἐξῃρημένης παρουσίας. ἀλλὰ ταῦτα
μὲν ἀμφὶ τὸν μέγαν Διόνυσον οὐκ οἶδ᾽ ὅπως
ἐπῆλθέ μοι βακχεύοντι μανῆναι· [218] τὸν βοῦν δὲ
ἐπιτίθημι τῇ γλώττῃ· περὶ τῶν ἀρρήτων γὰρ
οὐδὲν χρὴ λέγειν. ἀλλά μοι θεοὶ μὲν ἐκείνων καὶ
ὑμῶν δὲ τοῖς πολλοῖς, ὅσοι τέως ἐστὲ τούτων
ἀμύητοι, τὴν ὄνησιν δοῖεν.
</p>

<p>
(But since I have mentioned also the myths that
are suited to initiation, let us ourselves independently
try to see what sort of myths they must be
that suit one or the other of those two branches of
philosophy;<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> ethics and theology; cf. 216 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b</hi>.</note> and no longer need we call in the aid of
witnesses from the remote past for all points, but we
will follow in the fresh footprints of one<note place='foot'>Iamblichus; cf. <hi rend='italic'>Oration</hi> 4. 157 <hi rend='smallcaps'>d</hi>.</note> whom
next to the gods I revere and admire, yes, equally
with Aristotle and Plato. He does not treat of all
kinds of myths but only those connected with
initiation into the Mysteries, such as Orpheus,
the founder of the most sacred of all the Mysteries,
handed down to us. For it is the incongruous
element in myths that guides us to the truth.<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Oration</hi> 5. 170.</note> I
mean that the more paradoxical and prodigious the
riddle is the more it seems to warn us not to believe
simply the bare words but rather to study diligently
the hidden truth, and not to relax our efforts until
under the guidance of the gods those hidden things
become plain, and so initiate or rather perfect our intelligence
or whatever we possess that is more sublime
than the intelligence, I mean that small particle of
the One and the Good which contains the whole indivisibly,
the complement of the soul, and in the One
and the Good comprehends the whole of soul itself
through the prevailing and separate and distinct
presence of the One. But I was impelled I know not
how to rave with his own sacred frenzy when I spoke
like this of the attributes of great Dionysus<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Oration</hi> 4. 144 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a</hi>.</note>; and
now I set an ox on my tongue:<note place='foot'>A proverb for mysterious silence; cf. Theognis 815;
Aesch. <hi rend='italic'>Ag.</hi> 36.</note> for I may not
reveal what is too sacred for speech. However, may
the gods grant to me and to many of you who
have not as yet been initiated into these Mysteries
to enjoy the blessings thereof!)
</p>

<p>
Ὑπὲρ δὲ ὧν εἰπεῖν τε καὶ ἀκοῦσαι θέμις
καὶ ἀνεμέσητον ἀμφοτέροις ἐστὶ, πᾶς λόγος
ὁ προφερόμενος ἔκ τε λέξεως καὶ διανοίας
σύγκειται. οὐκοῦν ἐπειδὴ καὶ ὁ μῦθος λόγος
τίς ἐστιν, [B] ἐκ δυοῖν τούτοιν συγκείσεται. σκοπῶμεν
δὲ ἑκάτερον αὐτῶν. ἔστιν ἁπλῆ τις ἐν
λόγῳ παντὶ διάνοια, καὶ μέντοι καὶ κατὰ σχῆμα
προάγεται, τὰ παραδείγματα δὲ ἀμφοῖν ἐστι
πολλά. τὸ μὲν οὖν ἓν ἁπλοῦν ἐστι καὶ οὐδὲν
δεῖται ποικιλίας, τὸ δ᾽ ἐσχηματισμένον ἔχει διαφορὰς
ἐν ἑαυτῷ πολλάς, ὧν, εἴ τί σοι τῆς ῥητορικῆς
ἐμέλησεν, οὐκ ἀξύνετος εἶ. τούτων δὴ τῶν
κατὰ διάνοιαν σχημάτων ἁρμόττει τῷ μύθῳ τὰ
πλεῖστα· πλὴν ἔμοιγε οὔθ᾽ ὑπὲρ τῶν πολλῶν οὔθ᾽
ὑπὲρ τῶν ἁπάντων ἐστὶ τά γε νῦν ῥητέον, ἀλλ᾽
ὑπὲρ δυοῖν, τοῦ τε σεμνοῦ κατὰ τὴν διάνοιαν καὶ
τοῦ ἀπεμφαίνοντος. [C] τὰ δὲ αὐτὰ ταῦτα καὶ περὶ
τὴν λέξιν γίνεται. μορφοῦται γάρ πως καὶ σχηματίζεται
παρὰ τῶν μὴ προφερομένων εἰκῇ μηδ᾽
ὥσπερ χειμάρρους ἑλκόντων συρφετοὺς ῥημάτων
ἐκ τῆς τριόδου· ἀλλὰ τοῖν δυοῖν τούτοιν, ὅταν
μὲν ὑπὲρ τῶν θείων πλάττωμεν, σεμνὰ χρὴ πάνυ
<pb n='108'/><anchor id='Pg108'/><anchor id='Pg109'/>
τὰ ῥήματα εἶναι καὶ τὴν λέξιν ὡς ἔνι μάλιστα
σώφρονα καὶ καλὴν καὶ τοῖς θεοῖς πρεπωδεστάτην,
τῶν αἰσχρῶν [D] δὲ μηδὲν καὶ βλασφήμων ἢ
δυσσεβῶν, ὅπως μὴ τῷ πλήθει τῆς τοιαύτης
ἀρχηγοὶ θρασύτητος γενώμεθα, μᾶλλον δὲ καὶ
πρὸ τοῦ πλήθους αὐτοὶ τὸ περὶ τοὺς θεοὺς ἠσεβηκέναι
προλάβωμεν. οὐδὲν οὖν ἀπεμφαῖνον
εἶναι χρὴ περὶ τὰς τοιαύτας λέξεις, ἀλλὰ σεμνὰ
πάντα καὶ καλὰ καὶ μεγαλοπρεπῆ καὶ θεῖα καὶ
καθαρὰ καὶ τῆς τῶν θεῶν οὐσίας εἰς δύναμιν
ἐστοχασμένα· [219] τὸ δὲ κατὰ τὴν διάνοιαν ἀπεμφαῖνον
τοῦ χρησίμου γιγνόμενον χάριν ἐγκριτέον,
ὡς ἂν μή τινος ὑπομνήσεως ἔξωθεν οἱ ἄνθρωποι
δεόμενοι, ἀλλ᾽ ὑπὸ τῶν ἐν αὐτῷ λεγομένων τῷ
μύθῳ διδασκόμενοι τὸ λανθάνον μῶσθαι καὶ πολυπραγμονεῖν
ὑφ᾽ ἡγεμόσι τοῖς θεοῖς προθυμηθεῖεν.
ἰδοῦ γὰρ ἔγωγε πολλῶν ἤκουσα λεγόντων ἄνθρωπον
μὲν τὸν Διόνυσον, ἐπείπερ ἐκ Σεμέλης ἐγένετο,
θεὸν δὲ διὰ θεουργίας [B] καὶ τελεστικῆς, ὥσπερ τὸν
δεσπότην Ἡρακλέα διὰ τῆς βασιλικῆς ἀρετῆς εἰς
τὸν Ὄλυμπον ὑπὸ τοῦ πατρὸς ἀνῆχθαι τοῦ Διός.
ἀλλ᾽, ὦ τάν, εἶπον, οὐ ξυνίετε τοῦ μύθου φανερῶς
αἰνιττομένου. ποῦ γὰρ ἡ γένεσίς ἐστιν ὥσπερ
Ἡρακλέους, οὕτω δὴ<note place='foot'>δὴ Cobet, δὲ Hertlein, MSS.</note> καὶ Διονύσου, ἔχουσα μὲν
τὸ κρεῖττον καὶ ὑπερέχον καὶ ἐξῃρημένον, ἐν τῷ
μετρίῳ δὲ ὅμως ἔτι τῆς ἀνθρωπίνης φύσεως
μένουσα καί [C] πως ἀφομοιουμένη πρὸς ἡμᾶς; Ἡρακλὴς
δὲ λέγεται παιδίον γενέσθαι καὶ κατὰ
μικρὸν αὐτῷ τὸ σῶμα τὸ θεῖον ἐπιδοῦναι, καὶ
<pb n='110'/><anchor id='Pg110'/><anchor id='Pg111'/>
φοιτῆσαι διδασκάλοις ἱστόρηται, καὶ στρατεύσασθαι
λέγεται καὶ κρατῆσαι πάντων, καμεῖν δὲ
ὅμως κατὰ<note place='foot'>κατὰ Cobet, καὶ Hertlein, MSS.</note> τὸ σῶμα. καίτοι αὐτῷ ταῦτα μὲν
ὑπῆρξε, μειζόνως δὲ ἢ κατ᾽ ἄνθρωπον. ὅτε γὰρ ἐν
τοῖς σπαργάνοις ἀποπνίγων τοὺς δράκοντας καὶ
πρὸς αὐτὰ παραταττόμενος τὰ τῆς φύσεως
στοιχεῖα, θάλπη καὶ κρυμούς, [D] εἶτα τοῖς ἀπορωτάτοις
καὶ ἀμαχωτάτοις, ἐνδείᾳ λέγω τροφῆς καὶ
ἐρημίᾳ, καὶ τὴν δι᾽ αὐτοῦ πορείαν οἶμαι τοῦ
πελάγους ἐπὶ τῆς χρυσῆς κύλικος, ἣν ἐγὲ νομίζω
μὰ τοὺς θεοὺς οὐ κύλικα εἶναι, βαδίσαι δὲ
αὐτὸν ὡς ἐπὶ ξηρᾶς τῆς θαλάττης νενόμικα.
τὶ γὰρ ἄπορον ἦν Ἡρακλεῖ; τί δ᾽ οὐχ ὑπήκουσεν
αὐτοῦ τῷ θείῳ καὶ καθαρωτάτῳ σώματι, τῶν
λεγομένων τούτων στοιχείων δουλευόντων αὐτοῦ
τῇ δημιουργικῇ [220] καὶ τελεσιουργῷ τοῦ ἀχράντου
καὶ καθαροῦ νοῦ δυνάμει; ὃν ὁ μέγας Ζεὺς διὰ
τῆς Προνοίας Ἀθηνᾶς, ἐπιστήσας αὐτῷ φύλακα
τὴν θεὸν ταύτην, ὅλην ἐξ ὅλου προέμενος αὑτοῦ,<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Oration</hi> 4. 149 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b</hi>.</note>
τῷ κόσμῳ σωτῆρα ἐφύτευσεν, εἶτ᾽ ἐπανήγαγε διὰ
τοῦ κεραυνίου πυρὸς πρὸς ἑαυτόν, ὑπὸ τῷ θείῳ
συνθήματι τῆς αἰθερίας αὐγῆς ἥκειν παρ᾽ ἑαυτὸν
τῷ παιδὶ κελεύσας. ἀλλ᾽ ὑπὲρ μὲν τούτων ἐμοί
τε καὶ ὑμῖν ἵλεως Ἡρακλῆς εἴη.
</p>

<p>
(And now to confine myself to what is lawful for us,
both for me to say and for you to hear. Every
discourse that is uttered consists of language and the
thought to be expressed. Now a myth is a sort of
discourse and so it will consist of these two. Let us
consider them separately. In every discourse the
thought is of two kinds, either simple or expressed
in figures of speech; and there are many examples
of both kinds. The one is simple and admits of no
variety, but that which is embellished with figures
has in itself many possibilities of variation with all
of which you are yourself familiar if you have
ever studied rhetoric; and most of these figures of
thought are suited to myth. However I need not
now discuss all or indeed many of them, but only
two, that in which the thought is dignified and that
in which it is paradoxical. The same rules apply
also to diction. For this is given a certain shape
and form by those who do not express themselves
carelessly or sweep in the refuse of language from
the highways like a winter torrent. And now to
consider these two types. When we invent myths
about sacred things our language must be wholly
dignified and the diction must be as far as possible
sober, beautiful, and entirely appropriate to the
gods; there must be nothing in it base or slanderous
or impious, for fear we should lead the common
people into this sort of sacrilegious rashness; or
rather for fear we should ourselves anticipate the
common people in displaying impiety towards the
gods. Therefore there must be no incongruous
element in diction thus employed, but all must be
dignified, beautiful, splendid, divine, pure, and as far
as possible in conformity with the essential nature of
the gods. But as regards the thought, the incongruous
may be admitted, so that under the guidance
of the gods men may be inspired to search out and
study the hidden meaning, though they must not
ask for any hint of the truth from others, but must
acquire their knowledge from what is said in the
myth itself.<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Oration</hi> 5. 170 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b</hi>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>c</hi>.</note> For instance I have heard many
people say that Dionysus was a mortal man because
he was born of Semele, and that he became a god
through his knowledge of theurgy and the Mysteries,
and like our lord Heracles for his royal virtue was
translated to Olympus by his father Zeus. <q>Nay,
my good sir,</q> said I, <q>do you not perceive that
the myth is obviously an allegory?</q> For in what
sense do we regard the <q>birth</q> of Heracles, yes, and
of Dionysus as well, since in their case birth has
superior and surpassing and distinctive elements,
even though it still falls within the limits of human
nature, and up to a certain point resembles our
own? Heracles for instance is said to have been
a child, even as we are; his divine body grew
gradually; we are informed that he was instructed
by teachers;<note place='foot'>Cf. Dio Chrysostom, <hi rend='italic'>Oration</hi> 1. 61, Arnim.</note> they say that he carried on wars and
defeated all his opponents, but for all that his body
had to endure weariness. And in fact all this did
in his case occur, but on a scale greater than human.
For instance, while still in swaddling clothes he
strangled the serpents and then opposed himself to
the very elements of nature, the extremes of heat
and cold and things the most difficult and hardest
to contend with, I mean lack of food and loneliness;<note place='foot'>Cf. 230 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b</hi>.</note>
and then there is his journey over the sea itself in
a golden cup,<note place='foot'>Apollodorus, <hi rend='italic'>Bibliotheca</hi> 2; Athenaeus 11. 470.</note> though, by the gods, I do not think it
was really a cup, but my belief is that he himself
walked on the sea as though it were dry land.<note place='foot'>This is perhaps a passing sneer at the Christians and
need not be taken too seriously.</note> For
what was impossible to Heracles? Which was there
of the so-called elements that did not obey his
divine and most pure body since they were subdued
to the creative and perfecting force of his stainless
and pure intelligence? For him did mighty Zeus,
with the aid of Athene goddess of Forethought,
beget to be the saviour of the world, and appointed
as his guardian this goddess whom he had brought
forth whole from the whole of himself; and later on
he called him to his side through the flame of
a thunderbolt, thus bidding his son to come to him
by the divine signal of the ethereal rays of light.
Now when we meditate on this, may Heracles be
gracious to you and to me!)
</p>

<p>
Τὰ δὲ τῆς Διονύσου θρυλουμένης μὲν γενέσεως,
οὔσης δὲ οὐ γενέσεως, [B] ἀλλὰ δαιμονίας ἐκφάνσεως
κατὰ τί τοῖς ἀνθρωπικοῖς προσέοικεν; ἡ μήτηρ
<pb n='112'/><anchor id='Pg112'/><anchor id='Pg113'/>
αὐτὸν κύουσα, φασίν, ὑπὸ τῆς Ἥρας ζηλοτυπούσης
ἐξαπατηθεῖσα τὸν ἐραστὴν ἐξελιπάρησεν
ἥκειν, ὡς παρὰ τὴν γαμετὴν εἴωθε φοιτᾶν, πρὸς
ἑαυτήν· εἶτα οὐκ ἀνασχόμενον τὸ σωμάτιον τῶν
κτυπημάτων<note place='foot'>σωμάτιον ἓν τῶν κτυπημάτων Friederich; Hertlein approves
but would omit ἕν: δωμάτιον ἓν τῶν κτημάτων Hertlein, MSS.,
τὸ δωμάτιον ἓν κτύπημα τῶν Reiske, ἐνσκήψαντος Arnoldt.</note> τοῦ Διὸς ὑπὸ τοῦ κεραυνοῦ κατεφλέγετο.
πάντων δ᾽ ὁμοῦ πυρουμένων, Ἑρμῇ
κελεύσας ὁ Ζεὺς ἁρπάσαι τὸν Διόνυσον καὶ τεμὼν
τὸν αὑτοῦ μηρὸν ἐρράπτει· εἶτα ἐκεῖθεν, ἡνίκα
ἐτελεσφορήθη τὸ βρέφος, [C] ὠδίνων ὁ Ζεὺς ἐπὶ τὰς
νύμφας ἔρχεται· τὸ Λῦθι ῥάμμα δὲ αὗται τῷ
μηρῷ προσεπᾴδουσαι τὸν διθύραμβον ἡμῖν εῖς
φῶς προήγαγον· εἶτα ἐμάνη, φασίν, ὁ θεὸς ὑπὸ
τῆς Ἥρας, ἔπαυσε δ᾽ αὐτῷ τὴν νόσον ἡ Μήτηρ
τῶν θεῶν, ὁ δὲ ἦν αὐτίκα θεός. εἵποντο γοῦν οὐ
Λίχας αὐτῷ καθάπερ Ἡρακλεῖ οὐδὲ Ἰόλεως οὐδὲ
Τελαμὼν οὐδ᾽ Ὕλας οὐδ᾽ Ἄβδηρος, ἀλλὰ Σάτυροι
καὶ Βακχαὶ [D] καὶ Πᾶνες καὶ δαιμόνων στρατιά.
ὁρᾷς ὅπως ἀνθρωπικὴ μὲν ἡ σπορὰ διὰ τῶν
κεραυνίων, ἡ δ᾽ ἀποκύησις ἀνθρωπικωτέρα, ἀμφοῖν
δὲ τοῖν εἰρημένοιν προσομοιότερα τοῖς ἀνθρωπίνοις
τὰ ἔργα; τί οὖν οὐ καταβάλλοντες τὸν λῆρον
ἐκεῖνο πρῶτον ὑπὲρ τούτων ἴσμεν, ὡς Σεμέλη
σοφὴ τὰ θεῖα; παῖς γὰρ ἦν Κάδμου τοῦ Φοίνικος,
τούτοις δὲ καὶ ὁ θεὸς σοφίαν μαρτυρεῖ
</p>

<p>
(As for the commonly received legend about the
birth of Dionysus, which was in fact no birth but a
divine manifestation, in what respect was it like the
birth of men? While he was still in his mother's
womb she, as the story goes, was beguiled by jealous
Hera to entreat her lover to visit her as he was
wont to visit his spouse. And then her frail body
could not endure the thunders of Zeus and began to
be consumed by the lightning. But when everything
there was being devoured by flames, Zeus bade
Hermes snatch Dionysus forth, and he cut open his
own thigh and sewed the babe therein.<note place='foot'>Cf. Euripides, <hi rend='italic'>Bacchae</hi> 279 foll.</note> Then in
due course when the time was ripe for the child's
birth, Zeus in the pangs of travail came to the
nymphs, and they by their song over the thigh
<q>Undo the stitching</q><note place='foot'>Cf. Pindar <hi rend='italic'>fr.</hi> 85.</note> brought to light for us the
dithyramb. Whereupon the god was driven mad by
Hera, but the Mother of the Gods healed him of his
sickness and he straightway became a god. And he
had for followers not, like Heracles, Lichas for
instance or Iolaus or Telamon or Hylas or Abderos,
but Satyrs, Bacchanals, Pans and a whole host
of lesser divinities. Do you perceive how much of
human there is in this generation through the fire of
a thunderbolt, that his delivery is even more human,
and that his deeds, even more than these two that
we have mentioned, resemble those of human beings?
Now why do we not set aside all this nonsense and
recognise herein first the fact that Semele was wise
in sacred things? For she was the daughter of
Phoenician Cadmus, and the god himself bears
witness to the wisdom of the Phoenicians<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Oration</hi> 4. 134 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a</hi>.</note> when he
says)
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<lg>
<l>Πολλὰς καὶ Φοίνικες ὁδοὺς μακάρων ἐδάησαν</l>
</lg>

<p>
(<q>The Phoenicians too have learned many of the
roads travelled by the blessed gods.</q><note place='foot'>An oracular verse from an unknown source.</note>)
</p>

</quote>

<p>
λέγων. [221] αἰσθέσθαι οὖν μοι δοκεῖ τοῦ θεοῦ τούτου
πρώτη παρ᾽ Ἕλλησι καὶ τὴν ἐσομένην ἐπιφάνειαν
<pb n='114'/><anchor id='Pg114'/><anchor id='Pg115'/>
αὐτοῦ οὐκ εἰς μακρὰν προαγορεύσασα κινῆσαι
μὲν θᾶττον ἢ προσῆκον ἦν τινὰ τῶν περὶ αὐτὸν
ὀργίων, οὐκ ἀνασχομένη τὸν εἱμαρμένον περιμεῖναι
χρόνον, εἶτα ἀναλωθῆναι πρὸς τοῦ πυρὸς τοῦ
ῥυέντος ἐπ᾽ αὐτήν. ἐπεὶ δὲ ἐδέδοκτο τῷ Διὶ
κοινῇ πᾶσιν ἀνθρώποις ἐνδοῦναι ἀρχὴν καταστάσεως
ἑτέρας καὶ μεταβαλεῖν<note place='foot'>μεταβαλεῖν Hertlein suggests, μεταβάλλειν MSS.</note> αὐτοὺς ἐκ τοῦ
νομαδικοῦ βίου πρὸς [B] τὸν ἡμερώτερον, ἐξ Ἰνδῶν ὁ
Διόνυσος αὔτοπτος ἐφαίνετο δαίμων, ἐπιφοιτῶν
τὰς πόλεις, ἄγων μεθ᾽ ἑαυτοῦ στρατιὰν πολλὴν
δαιμονίων τινῶν<note place='foot'>τινῶν Hertlein suggests, τινὰ MSS.</note> καὶ διδοὺς ἀνθρώποις κοινῇ μὲν
ἅπασι σύμβολον τῆς ἐπιφανείας αὐτοῦ τὸ τῆς
ἡμερίδος φυτόν, ὑφ᾽ οὗ μοι δοκοῦσιν, ἐξημερωθέντων
αὐτοῖς τῶν περὶ τὸν βίον, Ἕλληνες τῆς
ἐπωνυμίας αὐτὸ ταύτης ἀξιῶσαι, μητέρα δ᾽ αὐτοῦ
προσειπεῖν τὴν Σεμέλην διὰ τὴν πρόρρησιν, ἄλλως
τε καὶ τοῦ θεοῦ τιμῶντος αὐτήν, [C] ἅτε πρώτην ἱερόφαντιν
τῆς ἔτι μελλούσης ἐπιφοιτήσεως.
</p>

<p>
(I think then
that she was the first among the Greeks to perceive
that there was to be before long a visible manifestation
of this god, and that she foretold it, and
then that, sooner than was fitting, she gave the
signal for certain of the mystic rites connected with
his worship, because she had not the patience to
wait for the appointed time, and thus she was
consumed by the fire that fell upon her. But when
it was the will of Zeus to bestow on all mankind in
common a new order of things, and to make them
pass from the nomadic to a more civilised mode
of life, Dionysus came from India and revealed
himself as very god made visible, visiting the cities
of men and leading with him a great host of beings
in some sort divine; and everywhere he bestowed
on all men in common as the symbol of his manifestation
the plant of <q>the gentle vine</q>; and since
their lives were made more gentle by it the Greeks
as I think gave it that name;<note place='foot'>ἡμερίς = the vine; ἥμερος = gentle.</note> and they called
Semele the mother of Dionysus because of the prediction
that she had made, but also because the god
honoured her as having been the first prophetess of
his advent while it was yet to be.)
</p>

<p>
Οὔσης δέ, ὡς ἄν τις ἀκριβῶς σκοπῶν ἐξετάσειε,
τῆς ἱστορίας τοιαύτης, οἱ τὸν Διόνυσον ὅστις ποτ᾽
ἐστὶ θεῶν ζητοῦντες τἀληθὲς ἔχον ὡς ἔφην εἰς
μῦθον διεσκεύασαν, αἰνιττόμενοι τήν τε οὐσίαν
τοῦ θεοῦ καὶ τὴν ἐν τοῖς νοητοῖς παρὰ τῷ πατρὶ
κύησιν καὶ τὸν ἀγέννητον αὐτοῦ τόκον ἐν τῷ
κόσμῳ<note place='foot'>κόσμω ... κατ ... γματ ... ξιν V, lacuna MSS.</note> ..... ἐν τῷ παντί, καὶ τἆλλα ἐφεξῆς ὅσα
τοῦ ζητεῖν ἦν ἄξια,<note place='foot'>ἄξια, φράζειν δέ γ᾽ οὐ ῥᾴδια ἐμοί Hertlein suggests, lacuna
MSS.</note> φράζειν δέ γ᾽ οὐ ῥᾴδια ἐμοί,
<pb n='116'/><anchor id='Pg116'/><anchor id='Pg117'/>
τυχὸν μὲν [D] καὶ διὰ τὸ ἀγνοεῖν ἔτι περὶ αὐτῶν τὸ
ἀκριβές, τυχὸν δὲ καὶ οὐκ ἐθέλοντι τὸν κρύφιον
ἅμα καὶ φανερὸν θεὸν ὥσπερ ἐν θεάτρῳ προβάλλειν
ἀκοαῖς ἀνεξετάστοις καὶ διανοίαις ἐπὶ πάντα
μάλλον ἢ τὸ φιλοσοφεῖν τετραμμέναις.
</p>

<p>
(Now since this is the historical truth of these
events if they are accurately considered and examined,
those who sought to discover what sort of god
Dionysus is worked into a myth the truth which
is as I said, and expressed in an allegory both the
essential nature of the god and his conception in his
father Zeus among the intelligible gods, and further
his birth independently of generation in this our
world.<note place='foot'>Here follows a lacuna of several words.</note> ... in the whole universe, and in their proper
order all those other facts which are well worth
studying but too difficult for me at any rate to
describe; partly perhaps because I am still ignorant
of the precise truth about them,<note place='foot'>Cf. Plato, <hi rend='italic'>Republic</hi> 382 <hi rend='smallcaps'>d</hi>.</note> but perhaps also
because I am unwilling to exhibit as in a theatre
this god who is at once hidden and manifest, and
that, too, to ears that have not sought after truth and
to minds disposed to anything rather than the study
of philosophy.)
</p>

<p>
Ἀλλ᾽ ὑπὲρ μὲν τούτων ἴστω Διόνυσος αὐτός,
ᾧ καὶ προσεύχομαι τάς τε ἐμὰς καὶ τὰς ὑμετέρας
ἐκβακχεῦσαι φρένας ἐπὶ τὴν ἀληθῆ τῶν θεῶν
γνῶσιν, ὡς ἂν μὴ πολὺν ἀβάκχευτοι χρόνον τῷ
θεῷ μένοντες [222] ὁπόσα ὁ Πενθεὺς<note place='foot'>Πενθεὺς ἔπαθε MSS.; Hertlein would omit ἔπαθε.</note> πάθωμεν, ἴσως
μὲν καὶ ζῶντες, πάντως δὲ ἀπαλλαγέντες τοῦ
σώματος. ὅτῳ γὰρ ἂν<note place='foot'>ἂν Hertlein would add.</note> μὴ τὸ πεπληθυσμένον
τῆς ζωῆς ὑπὸ τῆς ἑνοειδοῦς καὶ ἐν τῷ μεριστῷ
παντελῶς ἀδιαιρέτου ὅλης τε ἐν πᾶσιν ἀμιγοῦς
προüπαρχούσης οὐσίας τοῦ Διονύσου τελεσιουργηθῇ<note place='foot'>τελεσιουργηθῇ Hertlein suggests, τελεσιουργηθείη MSS.</note>
διὰ τῆς περὶ τὸν θεὸν ἐνθέου βακχείας,
τούτῳ κίνδυνος ἐπὶ πολλὰ ῥυῆναι τὴν ζωήν,
ῥυεῖσαν δὲ διεσπάσθαι καὶ διασπασθεῖσαν οἴχεσθαι·
[B] τὸ δὲ ῥυεῖσαν καὶ διασπασθεῖσαν μὴ προσέχων
τις τοῖς ῥήμασιν ὑδάτιον μηδὲ λίνου
μήρινθον ἀκροάσθω, ξυνιέτω δὲ τὰ λεγόμενα
τρόπον ἄλλον, ὃν Πλάτων, ὃν Πλωτίνος, ὃν
Πορφύριος, ὃν ὁ δαιμόνιος Ἰάμβλιχος. ὃς δ᾽
ἂν μὴ ταύτῃ ποιῇ, γελάσεται μέν, ἴστω μέντοι
<pb n='118'/><anchor id='Pg118'/><anchor id='Pg119'/>
Σαρδώνιον γελῶν ἔρημος ὢν ἀεὶ τῆς τῶν θεῶν
γνώσεως, ἧς ἀντάξιον οὐδὲ τὸ πᾶσαν ὁμοῦ μετὰ
τῆς τῶν Ῥωμαίων [C] ἐπιτροπεῦσαι τὴν βαρβάρων
ἔγωγε θείμην ἄν, οὐ μὰ τὸν ἐμὸν δεσπότην Ἥλιον.
ἀλλά με πάλιν οὐκ οἶδ᾽ ὅστις θεῶν ἐπὶ ταῦτ᾽
ἐβάκχευσεν οὐ προελόμενον.
</p>

<p>
(However let Dionysus himself decide about these
things, though I do indeed implore him to inspire
my mind and yours with his own sacred frenzy
for the true knowledge of the gods, so that we
may not by remaining too long uninspired by him
have to suffer the fate of Pentheus, perhaps even
while we are alive, but most certainly after death
has freed us from the body. For he in whom the
abundance of life has not been perfected by the
essential nature of Dionysus, uniform and wholly
indivisible as it is in the divisible world and pre-existing
whole and unmixed in all things, he I say
who has not been perfected by means of the
Bacchic and divine frenzy for the god, runs the risk
that his life may flow into too many channels, and as
it flows be torn to shreds, and hence come to
naught. But when I say <q>flow</q> or <q>torn to shreds</q>
no one must consider the bare meaning of the words
and suppose that I mean a mere trickle of water or
a thread of linen, but he must understand these
words in another sense, that used by Plato, Plotinus,
Porphyry and the inspired Iamblichus. One who
does not interpret them thus will laugh at them no
doubt, but let me assure him that it will be a
Sardonic laugh,<note place='foot'>A proverb for forced laughter, cf. <hi rend='italic'>Odyssey</hi> 22. 302;
Plato, <hi rend='italic'>Republic</hi> 337 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a</hi>.</note> since he will be forever deprived of
that knowledge of the gods which I hold to be more
precious than to rule over the whole world, Roman
and barbarian put together, yea, I swear it by my
lord Helios. But again some god or other and no
choice of my own has made me rave with this Bacchic
frenzy.)
</p>

<p>
οὗ δὲ ἕνεκεν ἔφην αὐτά· κατὰ μὲν τὴν διάνοιαν
ἀπεμφαίνοντες ὅταν οἱ μῦθοι γίγνωνται περὶ τῶν
θείων, αὐτόθεν ἡμῖν ὥσπερ βοῶσι καὶ διαμαρτύρονται
μὴ πιστεύειν ἁπλῶς, ἀλλὰ τὸ λεληθὸς
σκοπεῖν καὶ διερευνᾶσθαι. τοσούτῳ δ᾽ ἐστὶ
κρεῖττον ἐν τούτοις τοῦ σεμνοῦ τὸ ἀπεμφαῖνον,
ὅσῳ διὰ μὲν ἐκείνου καλοὺς λίαν καὶ μεγάλους
καὶ ἀγαθούς, [D] ἀνθρώπους δὲ ὅμως τοὺς θεοὺς
κίνδυνος νομίσαι, διὰ δὲ τῶν ἀπεμφαινόντων
ὑπεριδόντας τῶν ἐν τῷ φανερῷ λεγομένων ἐπὶ τὴν
ἐξῃρημένην αὐτῶν οὐσίαν καὶ ὑπερέχουσαν πάντα
τὰ ὄντα καθαρὰν νόησιν ἐλπὶς ἀναδραμεῖν.
</p>

<p>
(To go back then to what led me to say all this.
Whenever myths on sacred subjects are incongruous
in thought, by that very fact they cry aloud, as it
were, and summon us not to believe them literally
but to study and track down their hidden meaning.
And in such myths the incongruous element is even
more valuable than the serious and straightforward,
the more so that when the latter is used there is risk
of our regarding the gods as exceedingly great and
noble and good certainly, but still as human beings,
whereas when the meaning is expressed incongruous
there is some hope that men will neglect the more
obvious sense of the words, and that pure intelligence
may rise to the comprehension of the distinctive
nature of the gods that transcends all existing
things.)
</p>

<p>
[223] Αἴτιαι μὲν οὖν αὗται τοῦ τὴν τελεστικὴν καὶ
μυσταγωγὸν φιλοσοφίαν τὰ μὲν ῥήματα παντὸς
μᾶλλον εὐαγῆ καὶ σεμνὰ προφέρεσθαι, κατὰ δὲ
τὴν διάνοιαν ἀλλοιοτέραν ποιεῖσθαι τὴν ἐξήγησιν
τῶν τοιούτων. ὁ δὲ τῆς τῶν ἠθῶν ἐπανορθώσεως
ἕνεκα τοὺς λόγους πλάττων καὶ μύθους παράγων
δράτω<note place='foot'>δράτω τοῦτο Hertlein suggests, πρῶτον τῷ MSS.</note> τοῦτο μὴ πρὸς ἄνδρας, ἀλλὰ πρὸς παῖδας
<pb n='120'/><anchor id='Pg120'/><anchor id='Pg121'/>
ἤτοι καθ᾽ ἡλικίαν ἢ τῷ φρονεῖν, πάντως δὲ τῶν
λόγων τούτων δεομένους. εἰ μὲν οὖν ἡμεῖς σοι
παῖδες ἐφάνημεν εἴτε [B] ἐγὼ εἴτε Ἀνατόλιος οὑτοσί,
συγκαταρίθμει δὲ τούτῳ καὶ τὸν Μεμμόριον καὶ
τὸν Σαλούστιον, πρὸς τούτοις δέ, εἰ βούλει, καὶ
τοὺς ἄλλους ἑξῆς, Ἀντικύρας σοι δεῖ· τί γὰρ ἂν
ἀκκίζοιτί τις; ἐπεὶ πρὸς τῶν θεῶν καὶ πρὸς αὐτοῦ
τοῦ μύθου, μᾶλλον δὲ τοῦ κοινῇ πάντων βασιλέως
Ἡλίου, τί σοι μέγα ἢ μικρὸν πεποίηται ἔργον;
τίνι παρέστης ἀγωνιζομένῳ μετὰ τοὺ δικαίου; τίνα
ἐθεράπευσας πενθοῦντα, [C] τῷ λόγῳ διδάξας, ὅτι
μὴ κακὸν ὁ θάνατος μήτε τῷ παθόντι μήτε τοῖς
οἰκείοις αὐτοῦ; τίς δ᾽ αἰτιάσεταί σε τῆς ἑαυτοῦ
μειρακίσκος σωφροσύνης, ὅτι πεποίηκας αὐτὸν
ἐξ ἀσώτου σώφρονα καὶ καλὸν οὐ τὸ σῶμα μόνον,
ἀλλὰ πολὺ μᾶλλον τὴν ψυχὴν φαίνεσθαι; τίνα
δὲ ἄσκησιν ἐποιήσω τοῦ βίου; τί δέ σοι ἄξιον
τῆς Διογένους βακτηρίας ἢ ναὶ μὰ Δία τῆς
παρρησίας πεποίηται; ἔργον οἴει μέγα βακτηρίαν
λαβεῖν ἢ τρίχας ἀνεῖναι, [D] καὶ περινοστεῖν τὰς
πόλεις καὶ τὰ στρατόπεδα, καὶ τοῖς μὲν βελτίστοις
λοιδορεῖσθαι, τοὺς δὲ χειρίστους θεραπεύειν;
εἰπὲ πρὸς τοῦ Διὸς καὶ πρὸς τουτωνὶ τῶν ἀκροωμένων,
οἷ δι᾽ ὑμᾶς τὴν φιλοσοφίαν ἐκτρέπονται,
ἀνθ᾽ ὅτου πρὸς μὲν τὸν μακαρίτην Κωνστάντιον
εἰς Ἰταλίαν ἦλθες, οὐκέτι μέντοι καὶ μέχρι τῶν
Γαλλιῶν; καίτοι πορευθεὶς πρὸς ἡμᾶς, εἰ μηδὲν
ἄλλο, ξυνεῖναι γοῦν σου τῆς φωνῆς μᾶλλον
<pb n='122'/><anchor id='Pg122'/><anchor id='Pg123'/>
δυναμένῳ πλησιάζειν ἔμελλες ἀνθρώπῳ. [224] τί δὲ
καὶ τὸ περιθοιτᾶν πανταχοῦ καὶ παρέχειν πράγματα
ταῖς ἡμιόνοις; ἀκούω δὲ ἔγωγε καὶ τοῖς
τὰς ἡμιόνους ἐλαύνουσιν, οἳ μᾶλλον ὑμᾶς ἢ τοὺς
στρατιώτας πεφρίκασι· χρῆσθαι γὰρ αὐτοῖς τοῖς
ξύλοις<note place='foot'>τοῖς ξύλοις Hertlein would add; Naber suggest βάκτροις.</note> ἀκούω τινὰς ὑμῶν χαλεπώτερον ἢ τοῖς
ξίφεσιν ἐκεῖνοι. γίγνεσθε οὖν αὐτοῖς εἰκότως
φοβερώτεροι. πάλαι μὲν οὖν ὑμῖν ἐθέρμην ἐγὼ
τοῦτο τὸ ὄνομα, [B] νυνὶ δὲ αὐτὸ ἔοικα καὶ γράψειν.
ἀποτακτιστάς τινας ὀνομάζουσιν οἱ δυσσεβεῖς
Γαλιλαῖοι· τούτων οἱ πλείους μικρὰ προέμενοι
πολλὰ πάνυ, μᾶλλον δὲ τὰ πάντα πανταχόθεν
ξυγκομίζουσι, καὶ προσκτῶνται<note place='foot'>προσκτῶνται Hertlein suggests, προσῆν οἶμαι MSS.</note> τὸ τιμᾶσθαι
καὶ δορυφορεῖσθαι καὶ θεραπεύεσθαι. τοιοῦτόν
τι καὶ τὸ ὑμέτερον ἔργον ἐστί, πλὴν ἴσως τοῦ
χρηματίζεσθαι. τοῦτο δὲ οὐ παρ᾽ ὑμᾶς γίγνεται,
παρ᾽ ἡμᾶς δέ· συνετώτεροι γάρ ἐσμεν τῶν ἀνοήτων
ἐκείνων· ἴσως δὲ καὶ διὰ τὸ μηδὲν ὑμῖν εἶναι πρόσχημα
τοῦ φορολογεῖν εὐπροσώπως, [C] ὁποῖον
ἐκείνοις, ἣν λέγουσιν οὐκ οἶδ᾽ ὅπως ἐλεημοσύνην,
τὰ δ᾽ ἄλλα γε πάντα ἐστὶν ὑμῖν τε κἀκείνοις
παραπλήσια. καταλελοίπατε τὴν πατρίδα ὥσπερ
ἐκεῖνοι, περιφοιτᾶτε πάντη καὶ τὸ στρατόπεδον
διωχλήσατε μᾶλλον ἐκείνων καὶ ἰταμώτερον·
οἱ μὲν γὰρ καλούμενοι, ὑμεῖς δὲ καὶ
ἀπελαυνόμενοι. καὶ τί χρηστὸν ἐκ τούτων ὑμῖν
ἐγένετο, [D] μᾶλλον δὲ καὶ ἡμῖν τοῖς ἄλλοις; ἀνῆλθεν
ὁ Ἀσκληπιάδης, εἶτα ὁ Σερηνιανός, εἶτα ὁ
Χύτρων, εἶτα οὐκ οἶδα παιδάριον ὅ, τι ξανθὸν καὶ
εὔμηκες, εἶτα σύ, καὶ μεθ᾽ ὑμῶν ἄλλοι δὶς τοσοῦτοι.
<pb n='124'/><anchor id='Pg124'/><anchor id='Pg125'/>
τί οὖν ἐκ τῆς ὑμετέρας ἀνόδου γέγονεν ἀγαθόν,
ὦ λῷστοι; τίς ᾔσθετο πόλις ἢ τίς ἰδιώτης τῆς
ὑμετέρας παρρησίας; οὐκ ἀφρόνως μὲν τὸ ἐξ
ἀρχῆς εἵλεσθε τὴν ἐπὶ τὸν οὐδὲ ἰδεῖν ὑμᾶς θέλοντα
βασιλέα πορείαν, ἀνελθόντες δὲ ἀφρονέστερον
αὐτῇ καὶ ἀμαθέστερον καὶ μανιωδέστερον ἐχρήσασθε,
κολακεύσαντες ἅμα καὶ ὑλακτήσαντες καὶ
βιβλία δόντες [225] καὶ ταῦτα προσαχθῆναι<note place='foot'>προσαχθῆναι Hertlein suggests, πραχθῆναι MSS.</note> προσλιπαρήσαντες;
οὐδένα ὑμῶν οἶμαι ἐγὼ τοσαυτάκις
εἰς φιλοόοφου φοιτῆσαι, ὁσάκις εἰς
ἀντιγραφέως, ὥστε ὑμῖν Ἀκαδήμεια καὶ Λύκειον
ἀντὶ τῆς Ποικίλης τε ἦν τῶν βασιλείων τὰ
πρόθυρα.
</p>

<p>
(These then are the reasons why that branch of
philosophy which is connected with initiation and
the doctrines of the Mysteries ought by all means to
be expressed in devout and serious language, while
as regards the thought the narrative may be expounded
in a style that has stranger qualities. But
one who is inventing tales for the purpose of reforming
morals and inserts myths therein, does so not for
men but for those who are children whether in years
or intelligence, and who on all accounts stand in
need of such tales. If, however, you took us for
children, me, for instance, or Anatolius here, and you
may reckon with us Memmorius also and Sallust and
add if you please all the others in due order, then
you need a voyage to Anticyra.<note place='foot'>Hellebore, supposed to be a cure for madness, grew at
Anticyra; hence the proverb: cf. Horace, <hi rend='italic'>Satires</hi> 2. 3. 166.</note> For why should
one pretend to be polite? Tell me, I ask, in the
name of the gods, and of myth itself, or rather in the
name of Helios the King of all the universe, what
have you ever accomplished, great or small? When
did you ever champion one who was resisting
oppression and had right on his side? When did
you ever comfort the mourner and teach him by
your arguments that death is not an evil either for
him who has suffered it or for his friends? What youth
will ever give you the credit for his temperance, and
say that you have made him show himself sober instead
of dissolute, and beautiful not merely in body
but far more in soul? What strenuous discipline
have you ever embraced? What have you ever
done to make you worthy of the staff of Diogenes or
still more, by Zeus, of his freedom of speech? Do
you really think it so great an achievement to carry
a staff and let your hair grow, and haunt cities and
camps uttering calumnies against the noblest men,
and flattering the vilest? Tell me in the name of
Zeus and of this audience now present, who are disgusted
with philosophy because of men of your sort,
why was it that you visited the late Emperor Constantius
in Italy but could not travel as far as Gaul?
And yet if you had come to me you would at any
rate have associated with one who was better able to
comprehend your language. What do you gain by
travelling about in all directions and wearing out the
very mules you ride? Yes, and I hear that you
wear out the mule drivers as well, and that they
dread the sight of you Cynics even more than of
soldiers. For I am told that some of you belabour
them more cruelly with your staffs than do the
soldiers with their swords, so that they are naturally
more afraid of you. Long ago I gave you a nickname
and now I think I will write it down. It is
<q>monks,</q><note place='foot'>Or <q>solitaries</q>; the word also means <q>heretic</q>; but
Julian evidently alludes to Christian monks who lived on
charity.</note> a name applied to certain persons by the
impious Galilaeans. They are for the most part men
who by making small sacrifices gain much or rather
everything from all sources, and in addition secure
honour, crowds of attendants and flattery. Something
like that is your method, except perhaps for
uttering divine revelations: but this is not your
custom, though it is ours; for we are wiser than those
insensate men. And perhaps too there is this difference
that you have no excuse for levying tribute on
specious pretexts as they do; which they call <q>alms,</q>
whatever that may mean. But in all other respects
your habits and theirs are very much alike. Like
them you have abandoned your country, you wander
about all over the world, and you gave more trouble
than they did at my headquarters, and were more insolent.
For they were at any rate invited to come, but
you we tried to drive away. And what good have you,
or rather, what have the rest of us derived from all
this? First arrived Asclepiades, then Serenianus,
then Chytron, then a tall boy with yellow hair&mdash;I
don't know his name&mdash;then you, and with you all
twice as many more. And now, my good sirs, what
good has come from your journey? What city or
individual has had any experience of your alleged
freedom of speech? Was it not foolish of you to
choose in the first place to make this journey to an
Emperor who did not even wish to set eyes on you?
And when you had arrived, did you not behave even
more foolishly and ignorantly and insanely in flattering
and barking at me in the same breath, and
offering me your books, and moreover imploring that
they should be taken to me? I do not believe that
any one of you ever visited a philosopher's school as
diligently as you did my secretary: in fact the
entrance to the Palace stood for you in place of the
Academy and the Lyceum and the Portico.)
</p>

<p>
Οὐκ ἀπάξετε ταῦτα; οὐ καταβαλεῖτε νῦν
γοῦν, εἰ καὶ μὴ πρότερον, ὅτε ὑμῖν οὐδέν ἐστι
πλέον ἀπὸ τῆς κόμης καὶ τῆς βακτηρίας; πῶς δὲ
καὶ γέγονεν ὑφ᾽ ὑμῶν εὐκαταφρόνητος ἡ φιλοσοφία;
τῶν ῥητορικῶν [B] οἱ δυσμαθέστατοι καὶ οὐδ᾽
ὑπ᾽ αὐτοῦ τοῦ βασιλέως Ἑρμοῦ τὴν γλῶτταν
ἐκκαθαρθῆναι δυνάμενοι, φρενωθῆναι δὲ οὐδὲ
πρὸς αὐτῆς τῆς Ἀθηνᾶς σὺν τῷ Ἑρμῇ, τοῦτο ἐκ
τῆς ἀγοραίου καὶ περιτρεχούσης ἁρπάσαντες
ἐντρεχείας· οὐδὲ γὰρ ἐν παροιμίᾳ περιφερόμενον
αὐτὸ γιγνώσκουσι τὸ ὅτι βότρυς πρὸς βότρυν
πεπαίνεται· ὁρμῶσιν ἐπὶ τὸν Κυνισμόν· βακτηρία,
τρίβων, [C] κόμη, τὸ ἐντεῦθεν ἀμαθία, θράσος,
ἰταμότης καὶ πάντα ἁπλῶς τὰ τοιαῦτα. τὴν
σύντομον, φασίν, ὁδὸν καὶ σύντονον ἐπὶ τὴν
<pb n='126'/><anchor id='Pg126'/><anchor id='Pg127'/>
ἀρετὴν ἰέναι<note place='foot'>ἰέναι Cobet, πορευόμεθα Hertlein suggests, lacuna V.</note> ὄφελον καὶ ὑμεῖς τὴν μακρὰν ἐπορεύεσθε·
ῥᾷον ἂν δι᾽ ἐκείνης ἢ διὰ ταύτης ἤλθετε.
οὐκ ἴστε, ὅτι μεγάλας ἔχουσιν αἱ σύντομοι τὰς
χαλεπότητας; καὶ ὥσπερ ἐν ταῖς λεωφόροις ὁ μὲν
τὴν σύντομον ἐλθεῖν δυνηθεὶς ῥᾷον ἐκπερίεισι τὴν
κύκλῳ, οὐκέτι μέντοι τὸ ἀνάπαλιν ὁ κύκλῳ πορευθεὶς
ἔλθοι ἂν πάντως [D] καὶ τὴν ἐπίτομον, οὕτω δὴ<note place='foot'>δὴ Cobet, δὲ Hertlein, MSS.</note>
καὶ ἐν τῇ φιλοσοφίᾳ τέλος τέ ἑστι καὶ ἀρχὴ μία
γνῶναί τε ἑαυτὸν καὶ ἀφομοιωθῆναι τοῖς θεοῖς·
ἀρχὴ μὲν οὖν ἑαυτὸν γνῶναι, τέλος δὲ ἡ πρὸς τοὺς
κρείττονας ὁμοιότης.
</p>

<p>
(Have done with all this nonsense! At any rate
lay it aside now if not before, when you can get no
advantage from your long hair and your staff. Shall
I tell you how you have caused philosophy to be
lightly esteemed? It is because the most ignorant
of the rhetoricians, those whose tongues not King
Hermes himself could purify, and who could not
be made wise by Athene herself with the aid of
Hermes, having picked up their knowledge from
their industry in frequenting public places,&mdash;for
they do not know the truth of the current proverb,
<q>Grape ripens near grape</q><note place='foot'>A proverb to express emulation; cf. Juvenal 2. 81.</note>&mdash;then all rush into
Cynicism. They adopt the staff, the cloak, the long
hair, the ignorance that goes with these, the
impudence, the insolence, and in a word everything
of the sort. They say that they are travelling the
short and ready road to virtue.<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Erotici</hi> p. 759, says this of the Cynics; cf.
Diogenes Laertius 7. 121.</note> I would that you
were going by the longer! For you would more
easily arrive by that road than by this of yours.
Are you not aware that short cuts usually involve
one in great difficulties? For just as is the case
with the public roads, a traveller who is able to take
a short cut will more easily than other men go all
the way round, whereas it does not at all follow that
he who went round could always go the short cut,
so too in philosophy the end and the beginning are
one, namely, to know oneself and to become like
the gods. That is to say, the first principle is self-knowledge,
and the end of conduct is the resemblance
to the higher powers.)
</p>

<p>
Ὅστις οὖν Κυνικὸς εἶναι ἐθέλει, πάντων ὑπεριδὼν
τῶν νομισμάτων καὶ τῶν ἀνθρωπίνων
δοξῶν, εἰς ἑαυτὸν καὶ τὸν θεὸν ἐπέστραπται
πρότερον. ἐκείνῳ τὸ χρυσίον οὐκ ἔστι χρυσίον,
οὐχ ἡ ψάμμος ψάμμος, εἰ πρὸς ἀμοιβήν τις
αὐτὰ ἀξετάζοι καὶ τῆς ἀξίας αὐτῶν ἐπιτρέψειεν
αὐτῷ τιμητῇ γενέσθαι· [226] γῆν γὰρ αὐτὰ οἶδεν
ἀμφότερα. τὸ σπανιώτερον δὲ καὶ τὸ ῥᾷον ἀνθρώπων
εἶναι κενοδοξίας ταῦτα καὶ ἀμαθίας νενόμικεν
ἔργα· τὸ αἰσχρὸν ἢ καλὸν οὐκ ἐν τοῖς
ἐπαινουμένοις ἢ ψεγομένοις τίθεται, ἀλλ᾽ ἐν τῇ
φύσει· φεύγει τὰς περιττ`ας τροφάς· ἀποστρέφεται
δὲ τὰ ἀφροδίσια. βιαζομένου δὲ τοῦ
σώματος, οὐ δόξῃ προστέτηκεν οὐδὲ περιμένει τὸν
μάγειρον καὶ τὰ ὑποτρίμματα καὶ τὴν κνίσσαν,
οὐδὲ τὴν Φρύνην οὐδὲ τὴν Λαΐδα οὐδὲ τὴν τοῦ
δεῖνος<note place='foot'>τοῦ δεῖνος Cobet, τοῦ δὲ Hertlein, MSS.</note> περιβλέπεται γαμετὴν οὐδὲ [B] τὸ θυγάτριον
οὐδὲ τὴν θεράπαιναν· ἀλλ᾽ ὡς ἔνι μάλιστα ἐκ τῶν
<pb n='128'/><anchor id='Pg128'/><anchor id='Pg129'/>
προστυχόντων ἀποπλήσας τὴν θεραπείαν τοῦ
σώματος καὶ τὸ ἐνοχλοῦν ἐξ αὐτοῦ παρωσάμενος,
ἄνωθεν ἐκ τῆς Ὀλύμπου κορυφῆς ἐπιβλέπει τοὺς
ἄλλους
</p>

<p>
(Therefore he who desires to be a Cynic despises
all the usages and opinions of men, and turns
his mind first of all to himself and the god. For
him gold is not gold or sand sand, if one enquire
into their value with a view to exchanging them,
and leave it to him to rate them at their proper
worth: for he knows that both of them are but
earth. And the fact that one is scarcer and the
other easier to obtain he thinks is merely the result
of the vanity and ignorance of mankind. He will
judge of the baseness or nobility of an action, not by
the applause or blame of men but by its intrinsic
nature. He avoids any excess in food, and renounces
the pleasures of love. When he is forced to obey the
needs of the body he is not the slave of opinion, nor
does he wait for a cook and sauces and a savoury smell,
nor does he ever look about for Phryne or Lais or
So-and-so's wife or young daughter or serving-maid.
But as far as possible he satisfies his body's needs
with whatever comes to hand, and by thrusting aside
all hindrances derived from the body he contemplates
from above, from the peaks of Olympus, other
men who are)
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<lg>
<l>Ἄτης ἐν λειμῶνι κατὰ σκότον ἠλάσκοντας,</l>
</lg>

<p>
(<q>Wandering in darkness in the
meadow of Ate,</q><note place='foot'>Empedocles, <hi rend='italic'>fr.</hi> 21, Diels.</note>)
</p>

</quote>

<p>
ὑπὲρ ὀλίγων παντάπασιν ἀπολαύσεων ὑπομένοντας
ὅσα οὐδὲ παρὰ τὸν Κωκυτὸν καὶ τὸν Ἀχέροντα
θρυλοῦσιν οἱ κομψότεροι τῶν ποιητῶν. ἡ σύντομος
ὁδός ἐστιν αὕτη. [C] δεῖ γὰρ αὐτὸν ἀθρόως
ἐκστῆναι ἑαυτοῦ καὶ γνῶναι, ὅτι θεῖός ἐστι, καὶ
τὸν νοῦν μὲν τὸν ἑαυτοῦ ἀτρύτως καὶ ἀμετακινήτως
συνέχειν ἐν τοῖς θείοις καὶ ἀχράντοις καὶ
καθαροῖς νοήμασιν, ὀλιγωρεῖν δὲ πάντη τοῦ
σώματος καὶ νομίζειν αὐτὸ κατὰ τὸν Ἡράκλειτον
κοπρίων ἐκβλητότερον, ἐκ τοῦ ῥᾴστου δὲ αὑτῷ
τὰς θεραπείας ἀποπληροῦν, ἕως ἂν ὁ θεὸς ὥσπερ
ὀργάνῳ τῷ σώματι χρῆσθαι ἐπιτάττῃ.
</p>

<p>
(and for the sake of a few wholly
trifling pleasures are undergoing torments greater
than any by the Cocytus or Acheron such as the
most ingenious of the poets are always telling us
about. Now the true short cut to philosophy is this.
A man must completely come out of himself and
recognise that he is divine, and not only keep his
mind untiringly and steadfastly fixed on divine and
stainless and pure thoughts, but he must also utterly
despise his body, and think it, in the words of
Heracleitus, <q>more worthless than dirt.</q><note place='foot'>Heracleitus, <hi rend='italic'>fr.</hi> 96, Diels.</note> And by
the easiest means he must satisfy his body's needs so
long as the god commands him to use it as an
instrument.)
</p>

<p>
Ταῦτα μὲν οὖν ὡς φασὶ ταύτῃ.<note place='foot'>ὡς φασὶ ταύτῃ Cobet, cf. Oration 4. 148 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b</hi>, lacuna Hertlein,
MSS.</note> ἐπανάξω δὲ
ὅθεν ἐξέβην. ἐπειδὴ γὰρ τοὺς μύθους προσήκει
πρὸς παῖδας ἤτοι τῷ φρονεῖν, [D] κἂν ἄνδρες ὦσιν, ἢ
καὶ τοῖς καθ᾽ ἡλικίαν παιδαρίοις ἀπαγγέλλειν,
ἐξεταστέον ὅπως μήτε εἰς θεοὺς μήτε εἰς ἀνθρώπους
πλημμελὲς ᾿ἤ, καθάπερ ἔναγχος, δυσσεβές τι
ῥηθείη· καὶ προσέτι τοῦτο ἐν ἅπασιν ἀκριβῶς
βασανιστέον, εἰ πιθανός, εἰ τοῖς πράγμασι προσφυής,
εἰ μῦθός ἐστιν ἀληθῶς ὁ πλαττόμενος. ἐπεὶ
τό γε νῦν ὑπὸ σοῦ πεποιημένον οὐ μῦθός ἐστι σός·<note place='foot'>σός· Hertlein suggests; σός, ὡς ἔφης MSS.</note>
καίτοι τοῦτό γε ἐνεανιεύσω· ἀλλ᾽ ὁ μὲν μῦθος
<pb n='130'/><anchor id='Pg130'/><anchor id='Pg131'/>
ἐστι παλαιός, [227] ἐφήρμοσας δὲ αὐτὸν σὺ πράγμασιν
ἑτέροις, ὅπερ οἶμαι ποιεῖν εἰώθασιν οἱ τῇ τροπικῇ
χρώμενοι τὼν νοημάτων κατασκευῇ· πολὺς δὲ ἐν
τούτοις ὁ Πάριός ἐστι ποιητής. ἔοικας οὖν οὐδὲ
πεποιηκὼς μῦθον, ὦ ξυνετώτατε, μάτην νεανιεύεσθαι·
καίτοι τοῦτο τίτθης ἔργον ἐστὶν εὐτραπέλου.
Πλουτάρχου δὲ εἰ τὰ μυθικὰ διηγήματα
τῶν σῶν εἴσω χειρῶν ἀφῖκτο, οὔποτ᾽ ἂν ἐλελήθει
σε, τίνι διαφέρει πλάσαι τε ἐξ ἀρχῆς μῦθον καὶ
τὸν κείμενον ἐφαρμόσαι πράγμασιν οἰκείοις. [B] ἀλλ᾽
ἵνα μή σε τὴν σύντομον ὁδεύοντα βίβλοις ἐυβαλὼν
μακραῖς καὶ δυσελίκτοις ἐπίσχω μικρὰ καὶ
πεδήσω· σὺ δὲ οὐδὲ τὸν Δημοσθένους ἀκήκοας
μῦθον, ὃν ἐποίησεν ὁ Παιανιεὺς πρὸς τοὺς Ἀθηναίους,
ἡνίκα ὁ Μακεδὼν ἐξῄτει τοὺς Ἁθηναίους
ῥήτορας. ἐχρῆν οὖν τι τοιοῦτο πλάσαι· ἢ πρὸς
τῶν θεῶν ἔργον ἦν εἰπεῖν μυθάριόν τι τοιοῦτον;
ἀναγκάσεις δέ με καὶ μυθοποιὸν γενέσθαι.
</p>

<p>
(So much for that, as the saying is.<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Oration</hi> 4. 148 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b</hi>.</note> Now to go
back to the point at which I digressed.<note place='foot'>223 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a</hi>.</note> Since, as I
was saying, myths ought to be addressed either to
those who though grown men are children in intelligence,
or to those who in actual years are mere
children, we must take pains to utter in them
no word that is offensive to gods or men or
anything impious, as was done recently. And moreover
we must in all cases apply careful tests to see
whether the myth is plausible, closely related to the
matter discussed and whether what is invented
is really a myth. Now what you composed lately
is not your own myth though you boasted that it
was. Nay, your myth was an old one and you did
but adapt it to fresh circumstances, as I believe
people are in the habit of doing who use tropes
and figures of thought. The poet of Paros<note place='foot'>Archilochus.</note> for
instance is much given to this style. It seems then
that you did not even invent your myth, my very
clever friend, and that yours was an idle boast.
Though in fact the thing is done by any nurse with
an inventive turn. And if the mythical tales of
Plutarch had ever fallen into your hands you would
have failed to observe what a difference there is
between inventing a myth from the beginning and
adapting to one's own purpose a myth that already
exists. But I must not detain you even for a
moment or hinder you on your way along that short
cut to wisdom by making you embark on books that
are long and hard to read. You have not even
heard of the myth by Demosthenes which he of
the Paeanian deme addressed to the Athenians
when the Macedonian demanded that the Athenian
orators be given up. You ought to have invented
something of that sort. In Heaven's name was it
too hard for you to relate some little myth of the
kind? You will force me too to become a
myth-maker.)
</p>

<p>
[C] Πλουσίῳ ἀνδρὶ πρόβατα ἦν πολλὰ καὶ ἀγέλαι
βοῶν καὶ αἰπόλια πλατέ αἰγῶν, ἵπποι δὲ αὐτῷ
πολλάκις μυρίαι ἕλος κάτα βουκολέοντο, καὶ
ποιμένες δοῦλοί τε καὶ ἐλεύθεροι μισθωτοί, καὶ
βουκόλοι βοῶν καὶ αἰγῶν αἰπόλοι καὶ ἱπποφορβοὶ
τῶν ἵππων, καὶ πλεῖστα κτήματα. τούτων δὲ
αὐτῷ πολλὰ μὲν ὁ πατὴρ ἀπελελοίπει, πολλαπλάσια
δὲ αὐτὸς ἐπεκτήσατο,<note place='foot'>ἐπεκτήσατο Naber, ἐκτήσατο Hertlein, MSS.</note> πλουτεῖν θέλων
<pb n='132'/><anchor id='Pg132'/><anchor id='Pg133'/>
ἐν δίκῃ τε καὶ παρὰ δίκην· ἔμελε γὰρ αὐτῷ τῶν<note place='foot'>αὐτῷ τῶν Klimek, αὐτῷ καὶ τῶν Hertlein, MSS.</note>
θεῶν ὀλίγον. [D] ἐγένοντο δὲ αὐτῷ γυναῖκες πολλαὶ
καὶ υἱεῖς ἐξ αὐτῶν καὶ θυγατέρες, οἷς ἐκεῖνος
διανείμας τὴν οὐσίαν ἔπειτα ἐτελεύτησεν, οὐδὲν
αὐτοὺς οἰκονομίας πέρι διδάξας, οὐδ᾽ ὅπως ἄν τις
δύναιτο τὰ τοιαῦτα κτᾶσθαι μὴ παρόντα ἢ παρόντα
διαφυλάττειν. ᾤετο γὰρ ὑπὸ ἀμαθίας
ἀρκεῖν τὸ πλῆθος, ἐπεὶ καὶ αὐτὸς ἦν οὐ μάλα
ἐπιστήμων τῆς τοιαύτης τέχνης, ἅτε μὴ λόγῳ
προσειληφὼς αὐτήν, ἀλλὰ συνηθείᾳ τινὶ καὶ
πείρᾳ μᾶλλον, [228] ὥσπερ οἱ φαῦλοι τῶν ἰατρῶν ἐκ
τῆς ἐμπειρίας μόνον ἰώμενοι τοὺς ἀνθρώπους, ὅθεν
καὶ διαφεύγει τὰ πολλὰ τῶν νοσημάτων αὐτούς.
ἀρκεῖν οὖν νομίσας τὸ πλῆθος τῶν υἱέων πρὸς τὸ
φυλάξαι τὴν οὐσίαν οὐδὲν ἐφρόντισεν ὅπως
ἔσονται σπουδαῖοι. τὸ δὲ ἄρα αὐτοῖς ἦρξε πρῶτον
μὲν τῶν εἰς ἀλλήλους ἀδικημάτων. ἐπιθυμῶν
γὰρ ἕκαστος ὥσπερ ὁ πατὴρ πολλὰ ἔχειν καὶ
μόνος πάντα ἐπὶ τὸν πέλας ἐτράπετο. [B] τέως μὲν
οὖν τοῦτο ἐπράττετο. προσαπέλαυον δὲ καὶ οἱ
ξυγγενεῖς, οὐδ᾽ αὐτοὶ παιδευθέντες καλῶς, τῆς
τῶν παίδων ἀνοίας τε καὶ ἀμαθίας. εἶτα ἐπίμπλατο
φόνων πάντα, καὶ ἡ τραγικὴ κατάρα ὑπὸ
τοῦ δαίμονος εἰς ἔργον ἤγετο· τὰ πατρῷα γὰρ
θηκτῷ σιδήρῳ διελάγχανον, καὶ ἦν πάντα ἀκοσμίας
πλήρη· πατρῷα μὲν ἱερὰ κατεσκάπτετο παρὰ τῶν
παίδων ὀλιγωρηθέντα πρότερον ὑπὸ τοῦ πατρὸς
καὶ ἀποσυληθέντα τῶν ἀναθημάτων, [C] ἃ ἐτέθειτο
<pb n='134'/><anchor id='Pg134'/><anchor id='Pg135'/>
παρὰ πολλῶν μὲν καὶ ἄλλων, οὐχ ἥκιστα δὲ τῶν
προπατόρων αὐτοῦ. καθαιρουμένων δὲ τῶν ἱερῶν
ἀνῳκοδομεῖτο παλαιὰ καὶ νέα μνήματα, προαγορεύοντος
αὐτοῖς τοῦ αὐτομάτου καὶ τῆς τύχης, ὅτι
ἄρα πολλῶν αὐτοῖς δεήσει μνημάτων οὐκ εἰς
μακράν, ἐπειδήπερ αὐτοῖς ὀλίγον ἔμελε τῶν θεῶν.
</p>

<p>
(A certain rich man<note place='foot'>Constantine.</note> had numerous flocks of sheep
and herds of cattle and <q>ranging flocks of goats</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Iliad</hi> 2. 474.</note>
and many times ten thousand mares <q>grazed his
marsh-meadows.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Iliad</hi> 20. 221.</note> Many shepherds too he had,
both slaves and hired freedmen, neatherds and goatherds
and grooms for his horses, and many estates
withal. Now much of all this his father had
bequeathed to him, but he had himself acquired
many times more, being eager to enrich himself
whether justly or unjustly; for little did he care for
gods. Several wives he had, and sons and
daughters by them, among whom he divided his
wealth before he died. But he did not teach them
how to manage it, or how to acquire more if it
should fail, or how to preserve what they had. For
in his ignorance he thought that their mere numbers
would suffice, nor had he himself any real knowledge
of that sort of art, since he had not acquired his
wealth on any rational principle but rather by use
and wont, like quack doctors who try to cure their
patients by relying on their experience only, so that
many diseases escape them altogether.<note place='foot'>Cf. Plato, <hi rend='italic'>Charmides</hi> 156 <hi rend='smallcaps'>e</hi>.</note> Accordingly
since he thought that a number of sons would suffice
to preserve his wealth, he took no thought how to
make them virtuous. But this very thing proved to
be the beginning of their iniquitous behaviour to one
another. For every one of them desired to be as
wealthy as his father and to possess the whole
for himself alone, and so attacked the brother that
was his neighbour. Now for a time they continued
to behave thus. And their relatives also shared in
the folly and ignorance of those sons, since they
themselves had had no better education. Then
ensued a general slaughter, and heaven brought the
tragic curse<note place='foot'>The curse of Oedipus on his sons; cf. Euripides,
<hi rend='italic'>Phoenissae</hi> 67; Plato, <hi rend='italic'>Alcibiades</hi> 2. 138 <hi rend='smallcaps'>c</hi>; Aeschylus, <hi rend='italic'>Seven
Against Thebes</hi> 817, 942.</note> to fulfilment. For <q>by the edge of the
sword they divided their patrimony</q> and everything
was thrown into confusion. The sons demolished the
ancestral temples which their father before them had
despised and had stripped of the votive offerings
that had been dedicated by many worshippers, but
not least by his own ancestors. And besides demolishing
the temples they erected sepulchres<note place='foot'>The Christian churches were so called because they were
built over the tombs of the martyrs.</note> both
on new sites and on the old sites of the temples, as
though impelled by fate or by an unconscious
presentiment that they would ere long need many
such sepulchres, seeing that they so neglected the
gods.)
</p>

<p>
Πάντων οὖν ὁμοῦ φυρομένων καὶ ξυντελουμένων
γάμων τε οὐ γάμων καὶ βεβηλουμένων ὁμοῦ τοῖς
θείοις τῶν ἀνθρωπίνων, [D] τὸν Δία ἔλεος ὑπῆλθεν·
εἶτα ἀπιδὼν πρὸς τὸν Ἥλιον· ὦ παῖ, εἶπεν,
οὐρανοῦ καὶ γῆς ἀρχαιότερον ἐν θεοῖς βλάστημα,
μνησικακεῖν ἔτι διανοῇ τῆς ὑπεροψίας ἀνδρὶ
αὐθάδει καὶ τολμηρῷ, ὅς σε ἀπολιπὼν αὑτῷ τε καὶ
γένει αἴτιος<note place='foot'>γένει αἴτιος Cobet, γένει καὶ παισὶν αἴτιος Hertlein, MSS.</note> ἐγένετο τῶν τηλικούτων παθημάτων;
ἢ νομίζεις, [229] ὅτι μὴ χαλεπαίνεις αὐτῷ μηδ᾽ ἀγανακτεῖς
μηδ᾽ ἐπὶ τὸ γένος αὐτοῦ τοὺς οἰστοὺς θήγεις,
ἔλαττον εἶναι ταύτης αἴτιος αὐτῷ τῆς ξυμφορᾶς,
ἔρημον αὐτοῦ τὴν οἰκίαν ἀφείς; ἀλλ᾽, ἔφη, καλῶμεν
τὰς Μοίρας, εἴ πῃ βοηθητέος ὁ ἀνήρ ἐστιν. αἱ
δὲ ὑπήκουσαν αὐτίκα τῷ Διί. καὶ ὁ μὲν Ἥλιος,
ὥσπερ ἐννοῶν τι καὶ λογιζόμενος αὐτὸς ἐν ἑαυτῷ,
προσεῖχεν εἰς τὸν Δία πήξας τὰ ὄμματα. τῶν
Μοιρῶν δὲ ἡ πρεσβυτάτη· Κωλύετον, ἔφη, ὦ
πάτερ, ἡ Ὁσιότης ξὺν τῇ Δίκῃ. σὸν οὖν ἔργον
ἐστίν, [B] ἐπείπερ ἡμᾶς ἐκέλευσας ὑπεικαθεῖν αὐταῖς,
πεῖσαι καὶ ἐκείνας. ἀλλ᾽ ἐμαὶ γάρ εἰσιν, ἔφη,
θυγατέρες, καὶ ἄξιον δὴ ἐρέσθαι αὐτάς· τί τοίνυν,
<pb n='136'/><anchor id='Pg136'/><anchor id='Pg137'/>
ὦ ποτνία, φατόν; ἀλλὰ τούτου μέν, εἰπέτην, ὦ
πάτερ, αὐτὸς εἶ κύριος. σκόπει δὲ ὅπως ἐν ἀνθρώποις
ὁ πονηρὸς οὑτοσὶ τῆς ἀνοσιουργίας ζῆλος μὴ
παντάπασιν ἐπικρατήσει.<note place='foot'>ἐπικρατήσει Hertlein suggests, ἐπικρατήσῃ MSS.</note> πρὸς ἀμφότερα, εἶπεν,
ἐγὼ σκέψομαι. καὶ αἱ Μοῖραι πλησίον παροῦσαι
πάντα ἐπέκλωθον, [C] ὡς ὁ πατὴρ ἐβούλετο.
</p>

<p>
(Now when all was in confusion, and many marriages
that were no marriages<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> between cousins.</note> were being concluded,
and the laws of god and man alike had
been profaned, Zeus was moved with compassion
and addressing himself to Helios he said: <q>O my
son, divine offspring more ancient than heaven and
earth, art thou still minded to resent the insolence of
that arrogant and audacious mortal, who by forsaking
thee brought so many calamities on himself and
his race? Thinkest thou that, though thou dost not
show thine anger and resentment against him nor
whet thine arrows against his children, thou art
any less the author of his destruction in that thou
dost abandon his house to desolation? Nay,</q> said
Zeus, <q>let us summon the Fates and enquire whether
any assistance may be given the man.</q> Forthwith
the Fates obeyed the call of Zeus. But Helios who
was as though absorbed in thought and inward
debate yet gave constant heed and fixed his eyes on
Zeus. Then spoke the eldest of the Fates: <q>O our
father, Piety and Justice both restrain us. Therefore
it is thine to prevail on them also, since thou hast
ordered us to be subservient to them.</q> And Zeus
made answer, <q>Truly they are my daughters, and it
is meet that I question them. What then have ye to
say, ye venerable goddesses?</q> <q>Nay, father,</q> they
replied, <q>that is as thou thyself dost ordain. But be
careful lest this wicked zeal for impious deeds
prevail universally among men.</q> <q>I will myself look
to both these matters,</q> Zeus replied. Then the
Fates approached and spun all as their father
willed.)
</p>

<p>
Λέγειν δὲ ὁ Ζεὺς ἄρχεται πρὸς τὸν Ἥλιον· τουτὶ
τὸ παιδίον, ἔφη· ξυγγενὲς δὲ ἦν αὐτῶν ἄρα παρερριμμένον
που καὶ ἀμελούμενον, ἀδελφιδοῦς ἐκείνου
τοῦ πλουσίου καὶ ἀνεψιὸς τῶν κληρονόμων· τοῦτο,
ἔφη, σόν ἐστιν ἔκγονον. ὄμοσον οὖν τὸ ἐμόν τε
καὶ τὸ σὸν<note place='foot'>τὸ σὸν Hertlein suggests, σὸν MSS.</note> σκῆπτρον, ἦ μὴν ἐπιμελήσεσθαι διαφερόντως
αὐτοῦ καὶ ποιμανεῖν αὐτὸ καὶ θεραπεύσειν
τῆς νόσου. [D] ὁρᾷς γὰρ ὅπως οἷον ὑπὸ
καπνοῦ ῥύπου τε ἀναπέπλησται καὶ λιγνύος,
κίνδυνός τε τὸ ὑπὸ σοῦ σπαρὲν ἐν αὐτῷ πῦρ ἀποσβῆναι,
ἢν μὴ σύ γε δύσεαι ἀλκήν. σοὶ δὲ ἐγώ τε
ξυγχωρῶ καὶ αἱ Μοῖραι· κόμιζε οὖν αὐτὸ καὶ
τρέφε. ταῦτα ἀκούσας ὁ βασιλεὺς Ἥλιος ηὐφράνθη
τε ἡσθεὶς τῷ βρέφει, σωζόμενον ἔτι καθορῶν
ἐν αὐτῷ σπινθῆρα μικρὸν ἐξ ἑαυτοῦ, καὶ τὸ
ἐντεῦθεν ἔτρεφεν ἐκεῖνο τὸ παιδίον, ἐξαγαγὼν
</p>

<p>
(Next Zeus thus addressed Helios: <q>Thou seest
yonder thine own child.</q><note place='foot'>Julian himself.</note> (Now this was a certain
kinsman of those brothers who had been cast aside
and was despised though he was that rich man's
nephew and the cousin of his heirs.) <q>This child,</q>
said Zeus, <q>is thine own offspring. Swear then by
my sceptre and thine that thou wilt care especially
for him and cure him of this malady. For thou
seest how he is as it were infected with smoke and
filth and darkness and there is danger that the spark
of fire which thou didst implant in him will be
quenched, unless thou clothe thyself with might.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Iliad</hi> 9. 231.</note>
Take care of him therefore and rear him. For I and
the Fates yield thee this task.</q> When King Helios
heard this he was glad and took pleasure in the
babe, since he perceived that in him a small spark
of himself was still preserved. And from that time
he reared the child whom he had withdrawn)
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>ἔκ θ᾽ αἵματος ἔκ τε κυδοιμοῦ</l>
<l>[230] Ἔκ τ᾽ ἀνδροκτασίης.</l>
</lg>

<p>
(<q>from
the blood and noise of war and the slaughter of
men.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Iliad</hi> 11. 164.</note> )
</p>

</quote>

<p>
ὁ πατὴρ δὲ ὁ Ζεὺς ἐκέλευσε καὶ τὴν Ἀθηνᾶν τὴν
ἀμήτορα, τὴν παρθένον ἅμα τῷ Ἡλίῳ τὸ παιδάριον
ἐκτρέφειν. ἐπεὶ δὲ ἐτράφη καὶ νεανίας ἐγένετο
</p>

<p>
(And father Zeus bade Athene also, the
Motherless Maiden, share with Helios the task
of bringing up the child. And when, thus reared,
he had become a youth)
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<lg>
<l>Πρῶτον ὑπηνήτης, τοῦπερ χαριεστάτη ἥβη,</l>
</lg>

<p>
(<q>With the first down on his
chin, when youth has all its charms,</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Iliad</hi> 24. 348.</note>)
</p>

</quote>

<pb n='138'/><anchor id='Pg138'/><anchor id='Pg139'/>

<p>
κατανοήσας τῶν κακῶν τὸ πλῆθος. ὁπόσον τι περὶ
τοὺς ξυγγενεῖς αὐτοῦ καὶ τοὺς ἀνεψιοὺς ἐγεγόνει,
ἐδέησε μὲν αὑτὸν εἰς τὸν τάρταρον προέσθαι πρὸς
τὸ μέγεθος τῶν κακῶν ἐκπλαγείς. [B] ἐπεὶ δὲ Ἥλιος
εὐμενὴς ὢν μετὰ τῆς Προνοίας Ἀθηνᾶς ὕπνον τινὰ
καὶ κάρον ἐμβαλὼν τῆς ἐπινοίας ταύτης ἀπήγαγεν,
αὖθις ἀνεγερθεὶς ἄπεισιν εἰς ἐρημίαν. εἶτα ἐκεῖ
λίθον τινὰ εὑρὼν μικρὸν ἀνεπαύσατο καὶ πρὸς
αὑτὸν ἐσκόπει, τίνα τρόπον ἐκφεύξεται τῶν τοσούτων
κακῶν τὸ μέγεθος· ἤδη γὰρ αὐτῷ πάντα
ἐφαίνετο μοχθηρά, [C] καλὸν δὲ οὐδὲν οὐδαμοῦ τέως.
Ἑρμῆς οὖν αὐτῷ· καὶ γὰρ εἶχεν οἰκείως πρὸς
αὐτόν· ὥσπερ ἡλικιώτης νεανίσκος φανεὶς ἠσπάσατό
τε φιλοφρόνως καί, Δεῦρο, εἶπεν, ἡγεμών σοι
ἐγὼ ἔσομαι λειοτέρας<note place='foot'>λειοτέρας, Klimek, λείας Hertlein, MSS.</note> καὶ ὁμαλεστέρας ὁδοῦ
τουτὶ τὸ μικρὸν ὑπερβάντι τὸ σκολιὸν καὶ ἀπότομον
χωρίον, οὗ πάντας ὁρᾶς προσπταίοντας καὶ
ἀπιόντας ἐντεῦθεν ὀπίσω. καὶ ὁ νεανίσκος ἀπιὼν
ᾤχετο μετὰ πολλῆς εὐλαβείας ἔχων παρ᾽ ἑαυτῷ
ξίφος τε καὶ ἀσπίδα καὶ δόρυ,<note place='foot'>δόρυ Hertlein suggests, μάχαιραν MSS; cf. 231 <hi rend='smallcaps'>c</hi>.</note> γυμνὰ δὲ αὐτῷ
τέως ἦν τὰ περὶ τὴν κεφαλήν. [D] πεποιθὼς οὖν αὐτῷ
προῆγεν εἰς τὸ πρόσω διὰ λείας ὁδοῦ καὶ ἀθρύπτου
καθαρᾶς τε πάνυ καὶ καρποῖς βριθούσης ἄνθεσί
τε πολλοῖς καὶ ἀγαθοις, ὅσα ἐστὶ θεοῖς φίλα, καὶ
δένδρεσι κιττοῦ καὶ δάφνης καὶ μυρρίνης. ἀγαγὼν
δὲ αὐτὸν ἐπί τι μέγα καὶ ὑψηλὸν ὄρος, Ἐπὶ
τούτου, ἔφη, τῆς κορυφῆς ὁ πατὴρ πάντων
κάθηται τῶν θεῶν. ὅρα οὖν· ἐνταῦθά ἐστιν ὁ
μέγας κίνδυνος· ὅπως αὐτὸν ὡς εὐαγέστατα
προσκυνήσεις, αἰτήσῃ δὲ παρ᾽ αὐτοῦ ὅ, τι ἂν
<pb n='140'/><anchor id='Pg140'/><anchor id='Pg141'/>
ἐθέλῃς· [231] ἕλοιο δέ, ὦ παῖ, τὰ βέλτιστα. ταῦτα
εἰπὼν ἀπέκρυψεν ἑαυτὸν Ἑρμῆς πάλιν. ὁ δὲ
ἐβούλετο μὲν παρὰ τοῦ Ἑρμοῦ πυθέσθαι, τί ποτε
αἰτήσασθαι χρὴ παρὰ τοῦ πατρὸς τῶν θεῶν, ὡς
δὲ πλησίον ὄντα οὐ κατεῖδεν, Ἐνδεὴς μέν, ἔφη,
καλὴ δὲ ὅμως ἡ ξυμβουλή. αἰτώμεθα οὖν ἀγαθῇ
τύχῃ τὰ κράτιστα καίπερ οὔπω σαφῶς τὸν πατέρα
τῶν θεῶν ὁρῶντες. Ὦ Ζεῦ πάτερ ἢ ὅ,τι σοι φίλον
ὄνομα καὶ ὅπως ὀνομάζεσθαι· δείκνυέ μοι τὴν ἐπὶ
σὲ φέρουσαν ὁδὸν ἄνω. [B] κρείττονα γάρ μοι τὰ ἐκεῖ
φαίνεται χωρία παρὰ σὲ μαντευομένῳ τὸ παρὰ
σοὶ κάλλος ἀπὸ τῆς ἐν τούτοις ὅθεν πεπορεύμεθα
τέως ἀγλαΐας.
</p>

<p>
(he learned numerous disasters that had befallen his kinsmen
and his cousins, and had all but hurled himself into
Tartarus, so confounded was he by the extent of
those calamities. Then Helios of his grace, aided
Athene, Goddess of Forethought, threw him into
a slumber or trance, and so diverted him from that
purpose. Then when he had waked from this he
went away into the desert. And there he found
a stone and rested for a while thereon, debating
within himself how he should escape evils so many
and so vast. For all things now appeared grievous
to him and for the moment there was no hope
anywhere. Then Hermes, who had an affinity for
him,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> as the god of eloquence.</note> appeared to him in the guise of a youth of his
own age, and greeting him kindly said, <q>Follow me,
and I will guide thee by an easier and smoother road
as soon as thou hast surmounted this winding and
rugged place where thou seest all men stumbling
and obliged to go back again.</q> Then the youth set
out with great circumspection, carrying a sword and
shield and spear, though as yet his head was bare.
Thus relying on Hermes he went forward by a road
smooth, untrodden and very bright, and overhung
with fruits and many lovely flowers such as the gods
love, and with trees also, ivy and laurel and myrtle.
Now when Hermes had brought him to the foot of a
great and lofty mountain, he said, <q>On the summit
of this mountain dwells the father of all the gods.
Be careful then&mdash;for herein lies the greatest risk
of all<note place='foot'>Plato, <hi rend='italic'>Republic</hi> 618 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b</hi>.</note>&mdash;to worship him with the utmost piety and
ask of him whatever thou wilt. Thou wilt choose,
my child, only what is best.</q> So saying Hermes
once more became invisible, though the youth was
fain to learn from him what he ought to ask from the
father of the gods. But when he saw that he was
no longer at his side he said, <q>The advice though
incomplete is good nevertheless. Therefore let me
by the grace of fortune ask for what is best, though
I do not as yet see clearly the father of the gods.
Father Zeus&mdash;or whatever name thou dost please
that men should call thee by,<note place='foot'>Cf. Aeschylus, <hi rend='italic'>Agamemnon</hi> 160.</note>&mdash;show me the way
that leads upwards to thee. For fairer still methinks
the region where thou art, if I may judge of the
beauty of thy abode from the splendour of the place
whence I have come hither.</q>)
</p>

<p>
Εὐξαμένῳ ταῦτα εἴτε ὕπνος τις εἴτε ἔκστασις
ἐπῆλθεν. ὁ δὲ αὐτῷ δείκνυσιν αὐτὸν τὸν Ἥλιον.
ἐκπλαγεὶς οὖν ὁ νεανίσκος ὑπὸ τῆς θέας, Ἀλλὰ
σοὶ μέν, εἶπεν, ὦ θεῶν πάτερ, τῶν τε ἄλλων καὶ
τούτων [C] ἕνεκα πάντων ἐμαυτὸν φέρων ἀναθήσω.
περιβαλὼν<note place='foot'>περιβαλὼν Cobet, περιβάλλων Hertlein, MSS.</note> δὲ τοῖς γόνασι τοῦ Ἡλίου τὰς χεῖρας
ἀπρὶξ εἴχετο σώζειν ἑαυτὸν δεόμενος. ὁ δὲ καλέσας
τὴν Ἀθηνᾶν ἐκέλευε πρῶτον ἀνακρίνειν αὐτόν,
ὁπόσα ἐκόμισεν ὅπλα. ἐπεὶ δὲ ἑώρα τήν τε ἀσπίδα
καὶ τὸ ξίφος μετὰ τοῦ δόρατος, Ἀλλὰ ποῦ σοι,
ἔφη, ὦ παῖ, τὸ Γοργόνειον καὶ τὸ κράνος; ὁ δέ,
Καὶ ταῦτα, εἶπε, μόγις ἐκτησάμην· οὐδεὶς γὰρ ἦν
ὁ ξυμπονῶν ἐν τῇ τῶν συγγενῶν οἰκίᾳ παρερριμμένῳ.
Ἴσθι οὖν, εἶπεν ὁ μέγας Ἥλιος, ὅτι σε
πάντως χρὴ [D] ἐπανελθεῖν ἐκεῖσε. ἐνταῦθα ἐδεῖτο
<pb n='142'/><anchor id='Pg142'/><anchor id='Pg143'/>
μὴ πέμπειν αὐτὸν ἐκεῖσε πάλιν, ἀλλὰ κατέχειν,
ὡς οὐκέθ᾽ ὕστερον ἐπανήξοντα, ἀπολούμενον δὲ
ὑπὸ τῶν ἐκεῖ κακῶν. ὡς δὲ ἐλιπάρει δακρύων,
Ἀλλὰ νέος εἶ, ἔφη, καὶ ἀμύητος. ἴθι οὖν παρ᾽
ὑμᾶς, ὡς ἂν μυηθείης ἀσφαλῶς τε ἐκεῖ διάγοις·
χρὴ γάρ σ᾽ ἀπιέναι καὶ καθαίρειν ἐκεῖνα πάντα τὰ
ἀσεβήματα, παρακαλεῖν δὲ ἐμέ τε καὶ τὴν Ἀθηνᾶν
καὶ τοὺς ἄλλους θεούς. [232] ἀκούσας ταῦτα ὁ νεανίσκος
εἱστήκει σιωπῇ. καὶ ὁ μέγας Ἥλιος ἐπί
τινα σκοπιὰν ἀγαγὼν αὐτόν, ἧς τὸ μὲν ἄνω φωτὸς
ἦν πλῆρες, τὸ δὲ ὑποκάτω μυρίας ἀχλύος, δι ἧς
ὥσπερ δι᾽ ὕδατος ἀμυδρὸν τὸ φῶς διικνεῖτο τῆς ἐκ
τοῦ βασιλέως αὐγῆς Ἠλίου, Ὁρᾷς, εἶπε, τὸν
ἀνεψιὸν τὸν κληρονόμον; καὶ ὅς, Ὁρῶ, ἔφη. Τί
δέ; τοὺς βουκόλους τουτουσὶ καὶ τοὺς ποιμένας;
καὶ τούτους ὁρᾶν εἶπεν ὁ νεανίσκος. [B] Ποταπὸς οὖν
τίς σοι ὁ κληρονόμος φαίνεται; ποταποὶ δ᾽ αὖ οἱ
ποιμένες τε καὶ βουκόλοι; καὶ ὁ νεανίσκος, Ὁ μέν
μοι, ἔφη, δοκεῖ νυστάζειν τὰ πολλὰ καὶ καταδυόμενος<note place='foot'>καταδυόμενος Naber thinks corrupt, but cf. <hi rend='italic'>Letter to the
Athenians</hi> 285 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a</hi>.</note>
λεληθότως ἡδυπαθεῖν, τῶν ποιμένων δὲ
ὀλίγον μέν ἐστι τὸ ἀστεῖον, τὸ πλῆθος δὲ
μοχθηρὸν καὶ θηριῶδες. ἐσθίει γὰρ καὶ πιπράσκει
τὰ πρόβατα καὶ ἀδικεῖ διπλῇ τὸν δεσπότην. τά
τε γὰρ ποίμνια αὐτοῦ φθείρει καὶ ἐκ πολλῶν
μικρὰ ἀποφέρον [C] ἄμισθον εἶναί φησι καὶ οδύρεται.
καίτοι κρεῖττον ἦν τοὺς μισθοὺς ἀπαιτεῖν ἐντελεῖς
ἢ φθείρειν τὴν ποίμνην. Ἂν οὖν, ἔφη, σὲ ἐγὲ
μετὰ ταυτησὶ τῆς Ἀθηνᾶς, ἐπιτάττοντος τοῦ
<pb n='144'/><anchor id='Pg144'/><anchor id='Pg145'/>
Διός, ἀντὶ τοῦ κληρονόμου τούτου πάντων ἐπίτροπον
τούτων καταστήσω&mdash;; πάλιν ἐνταῦθα ὁ
νεανίσκος ἀντείχετο καὶ πολλὰ ἱκέτευεν αὐτοῦ
μένειν. ὁ δέ, Μὴ λίαν ἀπειθὴς ἔσο, φησί, μή
ποτέ
</p>

<p>
(When he had uttered this prayer a sort of
slumber or ecstasy came over him. Then Zeus
showed him Helios himself. Awestruck by that
vision the youth exclaimed, <q>For this and for all
thy other favours I will dedicate myself to thee, O
Father of the Gods!</q> Then he cast his arms about
the knees of Helios and would not let go his hold
but kept entreating him to save him. But Helios
called Athene and bade her first enquire of him what
arms he had brought with him. And when she saw
his shield and sword and spear, she said, <q>But where,
my child, is thy aegis<note place='foot'>Literally <q>the Gorgon's head,</q> which formed the centre
of the aegis or breastplate of Athene; cf. 234 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a</hi>.</note> and thy helmet?</q> <q>Even
these that I have,</q> he replied, <q>I procured with
difficulty. For in the house of my kinsfolk there
was none to aid one so despised.</q> <q>Learn therefore,</q>
said mighty Helios, <q>that thou must without
fail return thither.</q> Thereupon he entreated him
not to send him to earth again but to detain
him there, since he would never be able to mount
upwards a second time but would be overwhelmed
by the ills of earth. But as he wept and implored
Helios replied, <q>Nay, thou art young and not yet
initiated. Return therefore to thine own people
that thou mayst be initiated and thereafter dwell
on earth in safety. For return thou must, and
and cleanse away all impiety and invoke me to aid thee,
and Athene and the other gods.</q> When Helios
had said this the youth remained silent. Then
mighty Helios led him to a high peak whose upper
region was filled with light but the lower with the
thickest mist imaginable, through which, as through
water, the light of the rays of King Helios penetrated
but faintly. <q>Thou seest,</q> said Helios, <q>thy
cousin the heir?</q><note place='foot'>Constantius.</note> <q>I see him,</q> the youth replied.
<q>Again, dost thou see yonder herdsmen and shepherds?</q>
The youth answered that he did. <q>Then
what thinkest thou of the heir's disposition? And
what of his shepherds and herdsmen?</q> <q>He seems
to me,</q> replied the youth, <q>to be for the most part
asleep, sunk in forgetfulness and devoted to pleasure;
and of his shepherds a few are honest, but
most are vicious and brutal. For they devour
or sell his sheep, and doubly injure their master,
in that they not only ruin his flocks but besides
that they make great gain and return him but
little thereof, while they declare with loud complaint
that they are defrauded of their wages. And yet
it were better that they should demand and obtain
their full pay than that they should destroy the
flock.</q> <q>Now what if I and Athene here,</q> said
Helios, <q>obeying the command of Zeus, should
appoint thee to govern all these, in place of the
heir?</q> Then the youth clung to him again and
earnestly entreated that he might remain there.
<q>Do not be obstinate in disobedience,</q> said Helios,)
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<lg>
<l>σ᾽ ἀπεχθήρω, ὡς νῦν ἔκπαγλ᾽ ἐφίλησα.</l>
</lg>

<p>
(<q>lest perchance I hate thee beyond measure, even
as I have loved thee.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Iliad</hi> 3. 415.</note>)
</p>

</quote>

<p>
καὶ ὁ νεανίσκος, Ἀλλ᾽, ὦ μέγιστε, εἶπεν, Ἥλιε
καὶ Ἀθηνᾶ, σέ τε καὶ αὐτὸν ἐπιμαρτύρομαι τὸν
Δία, χρῆσθέ μοι πρὸς ὅ, τι βούλεσθε. [D] πάλιν οὖν
ὁ Ἑρμῆς ἄφνω φανεὶς ἐποίησε τὸν νεανίσκον
θαρραλεώτερον. ἤδη γὰρ διενοεῖτο τῆς τε ὀπίσω
πορείας καὶ τῆς ἐκεῖσε διατριβῆς ηὑρηκέναι τὸν
ἡγεμόνα. καὶ ἡ Ἀθηνᾶ, Μάνθανε, εἶπεν, ὦ λῷστε,
πατρὸς ἀγαθοῦ τουτουὶ τοῦ θεοῦ καὶ ἐμὸν βλάστημα.
τοῦτον, ἔφη, τὸν κληρονόμον οἱ βέλτιστοι
μὲν οὐκ εὐφραίνουσι τῶν ποιμένων, οἱ κόλακες δὲ
καὶ οἱ μοχθηροὶ δοῦλον καὶ ὑποχείριον πεποίηνται.
συμβαίνει οὖν [233] αὐτῷ παρὰ μὲν τῶν ἐπιεικῶν μὴ
φιλεῖσθαι, παρὰ δὲ τῶν νομιζομένων φιλεῖν<note place='foot'>φιλεῖν Cobet, φίλων Hertlein, MSS.</note> εἰς
τὰ μέγιστα ἀδικεῖσθαι; σκόπει οὖν ὅπως ἐπανελθὼν
μὴ πρὸ τοῦ φίλου θήσει τὸν κόλακα.
δευτέραν ἄκουέ μου παραίνεσιν, ὦ παῖ. νυστάζων
οὗτος ἐξαπατᾶται τὰ πολλά· σὺ δὲ νῆφε καὶ
γρηγόρει, μή σε διὰ τῆς τοῦ φίλου παρρησίας ὁ
κόλαξ ἐξαπατήσας λάθοι,<note place='foot'>λάθοι Hertlein suggests, λάθῃ MSS.</note> χαλκεὺς οἷά τις γέμων
καπνοῦ καὶ μαρίλης, [B] ἔχων ἱμάτιον λευκὸν καὶ τὰ
πρόσωπα τῷ ψιμυθίῳ κεχρισμένος, εἶτα αὐτῷ
δοίης γῆμαί τινα τῶν σῶν θυγατέρων. τρίτης
ἐπάκουέ μου παραινέσεως, καὶ μάλα ισχυρῶς
φύλαττε σαυτόν, αἰδοῦ δὲ καὶ ἡμᾶς μόνον, ἀνδρῶν
<pb n='146'/><anchor id='Pg146'/><anchor id='Pg147'/>
δὲ ὅστις ἡμῖν προσόμοιός ἐστιν, ἄλλον δὲ μηδένα.
ὁρᾷς ὅπως τοῦτον τὸν ἠλίθιον ἔβλαψεν αἰσχύνη
καὶ τὸ λίαν ἄγαν εἶναι καταπλῆγα;
</p>

<p>
(Then said the youth, <q>Do
thou, O most mighty Helios, and thou, Athene,&mdash;and
thee too, Father Zeus, do I call to witness,&mdash;dispose
of me as ye will.</q> Then Hermes suddenly appeared
once more, and inspired him with greater courage.
For now he thought that he had found a guide for
the journey back, and for his sojourn on earth.
Then said Athene, <q>Attend, good youth, that art
born of myself and of this god, thy noble sire! The
most virtuous of the shepherds do not please this
heir, for flatterers and profligates have made him
their slave and tool. Thus it is that he is not
beloved by the good, and is most deeply wronged by
those who are supposed to love him. Be careful
then when thou returnest that he make thee not his
flatterer rather than his friend. This second
warning also do thou heed, my son. Yonder man
slumbers, and hence he is often deceived, but do
thou be sober and vigilant,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Peter</hi> 1. 5. 8; <hi rend='italic'>Thessalonians</hi> 1. 5. 6.</note> lest the flatterer assume
the frankness of a friend and so deceive thee; which
is as though a smith covered with smoke and cinders
should come wearing a white garment and with his
face painted white, and thus induce thee to give him
one of thy daughters in marriage.<note place='foot'>An echo of Plato, <hi rend='italic'>Republic</hi> 495 <hi rend='smallcaps'>e</hi>.</note> My third
warning to thee is this: do thou very zealously keep
watch over thyself, and reverence us in the first
place, and among men only him who resembles us,
and no one besides. Thou seest how false shame
and excessive timidity have injured this foolish man.</q>)
</p>

<p>
Καὶ ὁ μέγας Ἥλιος αὖθις τὸν λόγον διαδεξάμενος
εἶπεν. [C] Ἑλόμενος φίλους ὡς φίλοις
χρῶ, μηδὲ αὐτοὺς οἰκέτας μηδὲ θεράποντας
νόμιζε, πρόσιθι δὲ αὐτοῖς ἐλευθέρως τε καὶ
ἁπλούστατα καὶ γενναίως, μὴ λέγων μὲν ἄλλα,
φρονῶν δὲ ἕτερα περὶ αὐτῶν. ὁρᾷς ὅτι καὶ
τοῦτον τὸν κληρονόμον τοῦτο ἐπέτριψεν, ἡ πρὸς
τοὺς φίλους ἀπιστία; φίλει τοὺς ἀρχομένους
ὥσπερ ἡμεῖς σέ· τὰ πρὸς ἡμᾶς ἡγείσθω σοι τῶν
καλῶν ἁπάντων· [D] ἐσμὲν γάρ σου καὶ εὐεργεταὶ καὶ
φίλοι καὶ σωτῆρες. ἀκούσας ταῦτα ὁ νεανίσκος
διεχύθη καὶ δῆλος ἦν ἅπαντα ἤδη τοῖς θεοῖς
πειθόμενος. Ἀλλ᾽ ἴθι, ἔφη, πορεύου μετὰ ἀγαθῆς
ἐλπίδος. ἡμεῖς γάρ σοι πανταχοῦ συνεσόμεθα
ἐγώ τε καὶ Ἀθηνᾶ καὶ Ἑρμῆς ὅδε καὶ σὺν ἡμῖν
οἱ θεοὶ πάντες οἱ ἐν Ὀλύμπῳ καὶ οἱ περὶ τὸν
ἀέρα καὶ τὴν γῆν καὶ πᾶν πανταχοῦ τὸ θεῖον
γένος, ἕως ἂν τά τε πρὸς ἡμᾶς ὅσιος ᾖς καὶ τὰ
πρὸς τοὺς φίλους πιστὸς καὶ τὰ πρὸς τοὺς
ὑπηκόους φιλάνθρωπος, [234] ἄρχων αὐτῶν καὶ ἡγούμενος
ἐπὶ τὰ βέλτιστα· ἀλλὰ μήτε ταῖς σεαυτοῦ
μήτε ταῖς ἐκείνων<note place='foot'>ταῖς ἐκείνων Cobet, ἐκείνων ταῖς Hertlein, MSS.</note> ἐπιθυμίαις δουλεύων ὑπεικάθηις.
ἔχων οὖν τὴν πανοπλίαν,<note place='foot'>τὴν πανοπλίαν Hertlein suggests, πανοπλίαν MSS.</note> ἣν ἐκόμισας
πρὸς ἡμᾶς, ἄπιθι προσλαβὼν ταύτην μὲν τὴν
δᾷδα παρ᾽ ἐμοῦ, ἵνα σοι καὶ ἐν τῇ γῇ φῶς
λάμπῃ μέγα καὶ μηδὲν ἐπιποθῇς τῶν τῇδε,
ταυτησὶ δὲ Ἀθενᾶς τῆς καλῆς τό τε Γοργόνειον
<pb n='148'/><anchor id='Pg148'/><anchor id='Pg149'/>
καὶ τὸ κράνος· πολλὰ γάρ, ὁρᾷς, ἐστὶν αὐτῇ, καὶ
δίδωσιν οἷς ἂν ἐθέλῃ. [B] δώσει δέ σοι καὶ Ἑρμῆς
χρυσῆν ῥάβδον. ἔρχου οὖν τῇ πανοπλίᾳ κοσμηθεὶς
ταύτῃ διὰ πάσης μὲν γῆς, διὰ πάσης δὲ
θαλάττης, ἀμετακινήτως τοῖς ἡμετέροις πειθόμενος
νόμοις, καὶ μηδείς σε μήτε ἀνδρῶν μήτε γυναικῶν,
μήτε τῶν οἰκείων μήτε τῶν ξένων ἀναπείσῃ τῶν
ἐντολῶν<note place='foot'>τῶν ἐντολῶν Hertlein suggests, ἐντολῶν MSS.</note> ἐκλαθέσθαι τῶν ἡμετέρων. ἐμμένων γὰρ
αὐταῖς ἡμῖν μὲν ἔσῃ φίλος καὶ τίμιος, αἰδοῖος
δὲ τοῖς ἀγαθοῖς ἡμῶν ὑπηρέταις, φοβερὸς δὲ
ἀνθρώποις πονηροῖς καὶ κακοδαίμοσιν. [C] ἴσθι δὲ
σεαυτῷ τὰ σαρκία δεδόσθαι τῆς λειτουργίας
ἕνεκα ταυτησί. βουλόμεθα γάρ σοι τὴν προγονικὴν
οἰκίαν αἰδοῖ τῶν προγόνων ἀποκαθῆραι.
μέμνησο οὖν, ὅτι τὴν ψυχὴν ἀθάνατον ἔχεις καὶ
ἔκγονον ἡμετέραν, ἑπόμενός τε ἡμῖν ὅτι θεὸς
ἔσῃ καὶ τὸν ἡμέτερον ὄψει σὺν ἡμῖν πατέρα.
</p>

<p>
(Then mighty Helios took up the tale and said,
<q>When thou hast chosen thy friends treat them as
friends and do not regard them as thy servants
and attendants, but let thy conduct towards them
be generous, candid, and honourable: say not one
thing about them while thou thinkest another.
Thou seest that it was treachery to his friends that
destroyed this heir. Love thy subjects even as we
love thee. Prefer our worship to all other blessings.
For we are thy benefactors and friends and preservers.</q>
At these words the youth became calm
and showed plainly that he was already obedient in
all things to the gods. <q>Come,</q> said Helios, <q>now
depart with good hope. For everywhere we shall be
with thee, even I and Athene and Hermes here, and
with us all the gods that are on Olympus or in the
air or on earth and the whole race of gods everywhere,
so long as thou art pious towards us and loyal
to thy friends, and humane towards thy subjects,
ruling them and guiding them to what is best. But
never yield to thy own passions or become the slave
of theirs. Keep the armour that thou hast brought
hither, and depart, but first receive from me this
torch so that even on earth a great light may shine
for thee and that thou mayst not long for the things
of earth. And from fair Athene here receive an
aegis and helmet. For as thou seest she has many,
and she gives them to whom she will. And Hermes
too will give thee a golden wand. Go then thus
adorned in full armour over sea and land, steadfastly
obeying our laws, and let no man or woman or
kinsman or foreigner persuade thee to neglect our
commands. For while thou dost abide by them thou
wilt be loved and honoured by us and respected by
our good servants and formidable to the wicked and
impious. Know that a mortal frame was given to
thee that thou mightest discharge these duties. For
we desire, out of respect for thy ancestor to cleanse
the house of thy forefathers. Remember therefore
that thou hast an immortal soul that is our offspring,
and that if thou dost follow us thou shalt be a god
and with us shalt behold our father.</q>)
</p>

<p>
Τοῦτο εἴτε μῦθος εἴτε ἀληθής ἐστι λόγος οὐκ
οἶδα. τὸ παρὰ σοῦ δὲ πεποιημένον, τίνα βούλει
τὸν Πᾶνα, [D] τίνα δὲ εἶναι τὸν Δία, εἰ μὴ τοῦτο,<note place='foot'>τοῦτο Hertlein suggests, τοῦτον MSS.</note>
ὡς ἐσμὲν ἐγώ τε καὶ σύ, σὺ μὲν ὁ Ζεύς, ἐγὼ δὲ
ὁ Πάν; ὢ τοῦ γελοίου Ψευδόπανος, γελοιοτέρου
μέντοι νὴ τὸν Ἀσκληπιὸν τοῦ πάντα μᾶλλον
ἢ Διὸς ἀνθρώπου. ταῦτα οὐκ ἔστιν ἀτεχνῶς
ἐκ μαινομένου<note place='foot'>μαινομένου Hertlein suggests, τοῦ μαινομένου MSS.</note> στόματος οὔτι τὴν ἔνθεον, ἀλλὰ
τὴν ἔκπληκτον μανίαν; οὐκ οἶσθα, ὅτι καὶ ὁ
Σαλμωνεὺς ἔδωκεν [235] ὑπὲρ τούτων τοῖς θεοῖς δίκην,
ὅτι ἄνθρωπος ὢν ἐπεχείρει Ζεὺς εἶναι; τὸ δὲ
ἐκ τῶν Ἡσιόδου λεγόμενον ὑπὲρ τῶν ὀνομασάντων
<pb n='150'/><anchor id='Pg150'/><anchor id='Pg151'/>
ἑαυτοὺς τοῖς τῶν θεῶν ὀνόμασιν, Ἥρας τε καὶ
Διός, εἰ μήπω καὶ νῦν ἀκήκοας, ἔχω σοι συγγνῶναι·
οὐδὲ γὰρ ἐπαιδοτριβήθης καλῶς οὐδὲ ἔτυχες
καθηγεμόνος, ὁποίου περὶ τοὺς ποιητὰς ἐγὼ
τουτουὶ τοῦ φιλοσόφου, μεθ᾽ ὃν ἐπὶ τὰ πρόθυρα
τῆς φιλοσοφίας ἦλθον ὑπ᾽ ἀνδρὶ τελεσθησόμενος,
ὃν νενόμικα τῶν [B] κατ᾽ ἐμαυτὸν πάντων διαφέρειν.
ὁ δέ με πρὸ πάντων ἀρετὴν ἀσκεῖν καὶ θεοὺς
ἁπάντων τῶν καλῶν νομίζειν ἡγεμόνας ἐδίδασκεν.
εἰ μὲν οὖν τι προὔργου πεποίηκεν, αὐτὸς ἂν εἰδείη
καὶ πρὸ τούτου γε οἱ βασιλεῖς θεοί· τουτὶ δὲ
ἐξῄρει τὸ μανιῶδες καὶ θρασύ, καὶ ἐπειρᾶτό με
ποιεῖν ἐμαυτοῦ σωφρονέστερον. ἐγὼ δὲ καίπερ,
ὡς οἶσθα, τοῖς ἔξωθεν πλεονεκτήμασιν ἐπτερωμένος
ὑπέταξα [C] ὅμως ἐμαυτὸν τῷ καθηγεμόνι
καὶ τοῖς ἐκείνου φίλοις καὶ ἡλικιώταις καὶ
συμφοιτηταῖς, καὶ ὧν ἤκουον ἐπαινουμένων παρ᾽
αὐτοῦ, τούτων ἔσπευδον ἀκροατὴς εἶναι, καὶ
βιβλία ταῦτα ἀνεγίγνωσκον, ὁπόσα αὐτὸς δοκιμάσειεν.
</p>

<p>
(Now whether this be a fable or a true narrative I
cannot say. But in your composition, whom do you
mean by Pan, and whom by Zeus unless you and I
are they, that is, you are Zeus and I am Pan?
What an absurd counterfeit Pan! But you are
still more absurd, by Asclepius, and very far indeed
from being Zeus! Is not all this the utterance
of a mouth that foams with morbid rather
than inspired madness?<note place='foot'>Plato, <hi rend='italic'>Phaedrus</hi> 244 foll.</note> Do you not know that
Salmoneus<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Odyssey</hi> 11. 235; Pindar, <hi rend='italic'>Pythian</hi> 4. 143; Salmoneus was
destroyed by a thunder-bolt for imitating the thunder and
lightning of Zeus.</note> in his day was punished by the gods for
just this, for attempting, though a mortal man, to
play the part of Zeus? Then too there is the
account in Hesiod's poems of those who styled themselves
by the names of the gods, even of Hera and
of Zeus, but if you have not heard of it till this
moment I can excuse you for that. For you have
not been well educated, nor did fate bestow on you
such a guide to the poets as I had&mdash;I mean this
philosopher<note place='foot'>Maximus of Ephesus.</note> now present: and later on I arrived at
the threshold of philosophy to be initiated therein
by the teaching of one<note place='foot'>Iamblichus.</note> whom I consider superior to
all the men of my own time. He used to teach me
to practise virtue before all else, and to regard the
gods as my guides to all that is good. Now whether
he accomplished anything of real profit he himself
must determine, or rather the ruling gods; but at
least he purged me of such infatuate folly and
insolence as yours, and tried to make me more
temperate than I was by nature. And though, as you
know, I was armed<note place='foot'>Literally <q>winged.</q></note> with great external advantages,
nevertheless I submitted myself to my preceptor and
to his friends and compeers and the philosophers of
his school, and I was eager to be instructed by all
whose praises I heard uttered by him, and I
read all the books that he approved.)
</p>

<p>
οὕτως ἡμεῖς ὑφ᾽ ἡγεμόσι τελούμενοι, φιλοσόφῳ
μὲν τῷ τὰ τῆς προπαιδείας με τελέσαντι,
φιλοσοφωτάτῳ δὲ τῷ τὰ πρόθυρα τῆς
φιλοσοφίας δείξαντι, σμικρὰ μὲν διὰ τὰς ἔξωθεν
ἡμῖν προσπεσούσας ἀσχολίας, [D] ὅμως δ᾽ οὖν ἀπελαύσαμεν
τῆς ὀρθῆς ἀγωγῆς, οὐ τὴν σύντομον,
ἣν σὺ φής, ἀλλὰ τὴν κύκλῳ πορευθέντες· καίτοι
νὴ τοὺς θεοὺς ἐπὶ τὴν ἀρετὴν οἶμαι ὅτι σου
συντομωτέραν ἐτραπόμην. ἐγὼ μὲν γὰρ αὐτῆς,
<pb n='152'/><anchor id='Pg152'/><anchor id='Pg153'/>
εἰ μὴ φορτικὸν εἰπεῖν, ἐπὶ τοῖς προθύροις ἕστηκα,
σὺ δὲ καὶ τῶν προθύρων εἶ πόρρω. σοὶ δὲ ἀρετῆς
ἢ τοῖς σοῖς ἀδελφοῖς&mdash;, ἀφελὼν δὲ τὸ δύσφημον
τὸ λειπόμενον αὐτὸς ἀναπλήρωσον· εἰ βούλει
δέ, καὶ παρ᾽ ἡμῶν αὐτὸ ἀνάσχου πρᾴως λεγόμενον,&mdash;τίς
μετουσία; [236] πᾶσιν ἐπιτιμᾷς αὐτὸς
οὐδὲν ἄξιον ἐπαίνου πράττων, ἐπαινεῖς φορτικῶς
ὡς οὐδεὶς τῶν ἀμαθεστάτων ῥητόρων, οἷς διὰ
τὴν τῶν λόγων ἀπορίαν καὶ τὸ μὴ ἔχειν εὑρεῖν
ἐκ τῶν παρόντων ὅ, τι φῶσιν, ἡ Δῆλος ἐπέρχεται
καὶ ἡ Λητὼ μετὰ τῶν παίδων, εἶτα κύκνοι λιγυρὸν
ᾄδοντες καὶ ἐπηχοῦντα αὐτοῖς τὰ δένδρα, λειμῶνές
τε ἔνδροσοι μαλακῆς πόας καὶ βαθείας πλήρεις,
ἥ τε ἐκ τῶν ἀνθέων ὀδμὴ καὶ τὸ ἔαρ αὐτὸ καί
τινες εἰκόνες τοιαῦται. [B] ποῦ τοῦτο Ἰσοκράτης
ἐν τοῖς ἐγκωμιαστικοῖς ἐποίησε λόγοις; ποῦ δὲ
τῶν παλαιῶν τις ἀνδρῶν, οἳ ταῖς Μούσαις
ἐτελοῦντο γνησίως, ἀλλ᾽ οὐχ ὥσπερ οἱ νῦν;
ἀφίημι δὲ τὰ ἑξῆς, ἵνα μὴ καὶ πρὸς τούτους
ἀπεχθανόμενος ἅμα τοῖς τε φαυλοτάτοις τῶν
Κυνικῶν καὶ τῶν ῥητόρων προσκρούσαιμι· ὡς
ἔμοιγε πρός τε τοὺς κρατίστους τῶν Κυνικῶν,
<pb n='154'/><anchor id='Pg154'/><anchor id='Pg155'/>
εἴ τις ἄρα ἔστι νῦν τοιοῦτος, καὶ πρὸς τοὺς
γενναίους ῥήτοράς [C] ἐστι φίλα<note place='foot'>φίλα Cobet, φιλικὰ Hertlein, MSS.</note> πάντα. τῶν μὲν
δὴ τοιούτων λόγων, εἰ καὶ πολὺ πλῆθος ἐπιρρεῖ·
καὶ οὐκ ἔστιν ὅσον οὐχὶ λέγειν ἐθέλων τις ἐκ
πάνυ δαψιλοῦς ἀντλήσειεν ἂν πίθου· τῆς προκειμένης
ἡμῖν ἀσχολίας ἕνεκεν ἀφέξομαι. μικρὰ
δὲ ἔτι τῷ λόγῳ προσθεὶς ὥσπερ ὀφλήματι τὸ
ἐνδέον ἐπ᾽ [D] ἄλλο τι τρέψομαι, ταυτηνὶ τὴν ξυγγραφὴν
αὐτοῦ που πληρώσας.
</p>

<p>
(Thus then I was initiated by those guides, in the
first place by a philosopher who trained me in the
preparatory discipline, and next by that most perfect
philosopher who revealed to me the entrance to philosophy;
and though I achieved but little on account
of the engrossing affairs that overwhelmed me from
without, still for all that I have had the benefit of
right training, and have not travelled by the short
road as you say you have, but have gone all the way
round. Though indeed I call the gods to witness, I
believe that the road I took was really a shorter road
to virtue than yours. For I, at any rate, if I may say
so without bad taste, am standing at the entrance,
whereas you are a long way even from the entrance.
<q>But as for virtue, you and your brethren&mdash;,</q><note place='foot'>A direct quotation from Demosthenes, <hi rend='italic'>De Corona</hi> 128;
the word omitted by Julian is κάθαρμα = <q>off-scourings,</q> or
<q>outcast,</q> addressed by Demosthenes to Aeschines.</note> omit
the ill-sounding phrase and fill in the blank yourself!
Or rather if you please, bear with me when I <q>put
it mildly</q><note place='foot'>An echo of Xenophon, <hi rend='italic'>Anabasis</hi> 1. 5. 14.</note>&mdash;<q>what part or lot have you in it?</q> You
criticise everybody, though you yourself do nothing
to deserve praise; your praises are in worse taste
than those of the most ignorant rhetoricians. They,
because they have nothing to say and cannot invent
anything from the matter in hand, are always
dragging in Delos and Leto with her children,
and then <q>swans singing their shrill song and
the trees that echo them,</q> and <q>dewy meadows
full of soft, deep grass,</q> and the <q>scent of
flowers,</q> and <q>the season of spring,</q> and other
figures of the same sort.<note place='foot'>For this device of introducing hackneyed poetical and
mythological allusions cf. Themistius 330, 336 <hi rend='smallcaps'>c</hi>; Aristides,
<hi rend='italic'>Oration</hi> 20. 428 <hi rend='smallcaps'>d</hi>; Himerius, <hi rend='italic'>Oration</hi> 18. 1. Epictetus
3. 282.</note> When did Isocrates ever
do this in his panegyrics? Or when did anyone of
those ancient writers who were genuine votaries of
the Muses, and not like the writers of to-day?
However, I omit what I might add, lest I should
make them also my enemies, and offend at once the
most worthless Cynics and the most worthless
rhetoricians. Though indeed I have nothing but
friendly feelings for the really virtuous Cynics, if
indeed there be any such nowadays, and also for all
honest rhetoricians. But though a vast number
of illustrations of this sort flow into my mind&mdash;for
anyone who desired to use them could certainly
draw from an ample jar<note place='foot'>A proverb for wealth; cf. Theocritus 10. 13.</note>&mdash;I shall refrain because of
the present pressure of business. However I have
still somewhat to add to my discourse, like the
balance of a debt, and before I turn to other matters
let me complete this treatise.)
</p>

<p>
Τίς οὖν ἡ τῶν Πυθαγορικῶν εὐλάβεια περὶ τὰ
τῶν θεῶν ὀνόματα, τίς δὲ ἡ Πλάτωνος; ποταπὸς
δὲ ἦν ἐν τούτοις Ἀριστοτέλης; ἆρ᾽ οὐκ ἄξιον αὐτὸ
ἰδεῖν; ἢ τὸν μὲν Σάμιον οὐδεὶς ἀντερεῖ τοιοῦτον
γενέσθαι; καὶ γὰρ οὔτε τὸ ὀνόματα θεῶν ἐν τῆς
σφραγῖδι φορεῖν ἐπέτρεπεν οὔτε τὸ ὅρκῳ χρῆσθαι
προπετῶς τοῖς τῶν θεῶν ὀνόμασιν. εἰ δὲ νῦν
λέγοιμι, [237] ὅτι καὶ εἰς Αἴγυπτον ἐπορεύθη καὶ
Πέρσας εἶδε καὶ πανταχοῦ πάντα ἐπειράθη τὰ
μυστήρια τῶν θεῶν ἐποπτεῦσαι καὶ τελεσθῆναι
παντοίας πανταχοῦ τελετάς, ἐρῶ μὲν ἴσως ἄγνωστά
σοι, γνώριμα μέντοι καὶ σαφῆ τοῖς πολλοῖς.
ἀλλὰ τοῦ Πλάτωνος ἄκουε· τὸ δ᾽ ἐμὸν δέος, ὦ
Πρώταρχε, πρὸς τὰ τῶν θεῶν ὀνόματα οὐκ ἔστι
κατ᾽ ἄνθρωπον, ἀλλὰ πέρα τοῦ μεγίστου φόβου.
καὶ νῦν τὴν μὲν Ἀφροδίτην, ὅπῃ ἐκείνῃ φίλον,
ταύτῃ προσαγορεύω· [B] τὴν δ᾽ ἡδονὴν οἶδα ὡς
ἔστι ποικίλον· ταῦτα ἐν Φιλήβῳ λέγεται, καὶ
τοιαῦτα ἕτερα πάλιν ἐν Τιμαίῳ· πιστεύειν γὰρ
<pb n='156'/><anchor id='Pg156'/><anchor id='Pg157'/>
ἁπλῶς ἀξιοῖ καὶ χωρὶς ἀποδείξεως λεγομένοις, ὅσα
ὑπὲρ τῶν θεῶν φασιν οἱ ποιηταί. ταῦτα δὲ
παρέθηκα, μή ποτέ σοι παράσχῃ πρόφασιν, ὥσπερ
οἶμαι τῶν Πλατωνικῶν πολλοῖς, ὁ Σωκράτης
εἴρων ὢν φύσει τὴν Πλατωνικὴν ἀτιμάσαι δόξαν.
ἐκεῖ γὰρ οὐχ [C] ὁ Σωκράτης, ἀλλ᾽ ὁ Τίμαιος ταῦτα
λέγει ἥκιστα ὢν εἴρων. καίτοι τοῦτό γέ ἐστιν οὐχ
ὑγιὲς μὴ τὰ λεγόμενα ἐξετάζειν, ἀλλὰ τοὺς λέγοντας,
καὶ τὸ πρὸς τίνας οἱ λόγοι γίγνονται. βούλει
δῆτα<note place='foot'>δῆτα Cobet adds, lacuna Hertlein, MSS.</note> τὸ μετὰ τοῦτο τὴν πάνσοφον ὑπαγορεύσω
σειρῆνα, τὸν τοῦ λογίου τύπον Ἑρμοῦ, τὸν τῷ
Ἀπόλλωνι καὶ ταῖς Μούσαις φίλον; ἐκεῖνος ἀξιοῖ
τοὺς ἐπερωτῶντας ἢ ζητεῖν ὅλως ἐπιχειροῦντας,
εἰ θεοί εἰσιν, οὐχ ὡς ἀνθρώπους ἀποκρίσεως τυγχάνειν,
ἀλλ᾽ ὡς [D] τὰ θηρία κολάσεως. εἰ δὲ ἀνεγνώκεις
τὸν συστατικὸν<note place='foot'>συστατικὸν Cobet, ἀστατικὸν V, Hertlein, ἐνστατικὸν
Reiske, εὐστατικὸν Spanheim.</note> αὐτοῦ λόγον, ὃς ὥσπερ τῆς
Πλάτωνος, οὕτω δὴ<note place='foot'>δὴ Cobet, δὲ Hertlein, MSS.</note> καὶ τῆς ἐκείνου διατριβῆς
προυγέγραπτο, ἔγνως ἂν πρὸ πάντων, ὅτι τὰ πρὸς
τοὺς θεοὺς εὐσεβεῖς εἶναι καὶ μεμυῆσθαι πάντα τὰ
μυστήρια καὶ τετελέσθαι τὰς ἁγιωτάτας τελετὰς
καὶ διὰ πάντων τῶν μαθημάτων ἦχθαι τοῖς εἴσω
τοῦ περιπάτου βαδίζουσι προηγόρευτο.<note place='foot'>προηγόρευτο Cobet, προηγορεύετο Hertlein, MSS.</note>
</p>

<p>
(I ask you then what reverence for the names of
the gods was shown by the Pythagoreans and by
Plato? What was Aristotle's attitude in these
matters? Is it not worth while to pay attention to
this? Or surely no one will deny that he of Samos<note place='foot'>Pythagoras.</note>
was reverent? For he did not even allow the names
of the gods to be used on a seal, nor oaths to be
rashly uttered in the names of the gods. And if
I should go on to say that he also travelled to Egypt
and visited Persia, and everywhere endeavoured to
be admitted to the inner mysteries of the gods and
everywhere to be initiated into every kind of rite, I
shall be saying what is familiar and obvious to most
people, though you may not have heard of it. However,
listen to what Plato says: <q>But for my part,
Protarchus, I feel a more than human awe, indeed a
fear beyond expression, of the names of the gods.
Now therefore I will address Aphrodite by whatever
name pleases her best; though as for pleasure,
I know that it has many forms.</q> This is what
he says in the Philebus<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Philebus</hi> 12 <hi rend='smallcaps'>c</hi>.</note> and he says the same sort
of thing again in the Timaeus.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Timaeus</hi> 40 <hi rend='smallcaps'>d</hi>; Julian fails to see that Plato is not
speaking seriously.</note> For he says that we
ought to believe directly and without proof what we
are told, I mean what the poets say about the gods.
And I have brought forward this passage for fear
that Socrates may furnish you with an excuse,&mdash;as
I believe he does to many Platonists because of his
natural tendency to irony,&mdash;to slight the doctrine of
Plato. For it is not Socrates who is speaking here,
but Timaeus, who had not the least tendency to
irony. Though for that matter it is not a sound
principle to enquire who says a thing and to whom,
rather than the actual words. But now will you
allow me to cite next that all-wise Siren, the living
image of Hermes the god of eloquence, the man
dear to Apollo and the Muses?<note place='foot'>Aristotle.</note> Well, he declares
that all who raise the question or seek to enquire at
all whether gods exist ought not to be answered as
though they were men but to be chastised as wild
beasts. And if you had read that introductory
sentence which was inscribed over the entrance to
his school, like Plato's, you would most surely know
that those who entered the Lyceum were warned to
be reverent to the gods, to be initiated into all
the mysteries, to take part in the most sacred
ceremonies, and to be instructed in knowledge of
every kind.)
</p>

<p>
[238] Σὺ δὲ ὅπως ἡμῖν μὴ τὸν Διογένη προβαλὼν
ὥσπερ τι μορμολυκεῖον ἐκφοβήσεις.<note place='foot'>ἐκφοβήσεις Cobet, ἐκφοβήσῃς Hertlein, MSS.</note> οὐ γὰρ
ἐμυήθη, φασίν, ἀλλὰ καὶ πρὸς τὸν προτρεπόμενον
μυηθῆναι, Γελοῖον, εἶπεν, ὦ νεανίσκε, εἰ τοὺς μὲν
τελώνας οἴει ταύτης ἕνεκα τῆς τελετῆς κοινωνήσειν
τοῖς ὁσίοις τῶν ἐν ᾅδου καλῶν, Ἀγησίλαον
<pb n='158'/><anchor id='Pg158'/><anchor id='Pg159'/>
δὲ καὶ Ἐπαμεινώνδαν ἐν τῷ βορβόρῳ κείσεσθαι.
τοῦτο, ὦ νεανίσκε, βαθὺ λίαν ἐστὶ καὶ δεόμενον
ἐξηγήσεως, [B] ὡς ἐμαυτὸν πείθω, μείζονος, ὁποίας<note place='foot'>ὁποίας Hertlein suggests, ὅπως MSS.</note>
ἡμῖν αὐταὶ δοῖεν αἱ θεαὶ τὴν ἐπίνοιαν; νομίζω δὲ
αὐτὴν ἤδη καὶ δεδόσθαι. φαίνεται γὰρ ὁ Διογένης
οὐχ, ὥσπερ ὑμεῖς ἀξιοῦτε, δυσσεβής, ἀλλ᾽ ἐκείνοις,
ὧν μικρῷ πρόσθεν ἐπεμνήσθην, προσόμοιος. ἀπιδὼν
γὰρ εἰς τὴν περίστασιν τὴν καταλαβοῦσαν
αὐτόν, εἶτα εἰς τὰς ἐντολὰς βλέπων τοῦ Πυθίου
καὶ συνιεὶς<note place='foot'>συνιεὶς Hertlein suggests, συνεὶς MSS.</note> ὅτι τὸν μυούμενον ἐχρῆν πολιτογραφηθῆναι
πρότερον καὶ Ἀθηναῖον, [C] εἰ καὶ μὴ
φύσει, τῷ νόμῳ γε γενέσθαι, τοῦτο ἔφυγεν, οὐ τὸ
μυηθῆναι, νομίζων αὑτὸν εἶναι τοῦ κόσμου πολίτην,
καὶ ταῖς ὅλαις τῶν θεῶν οὐσίαις, αἳ τὸν ὅλον
κοινῇ κόσμον ἐπιτροπεύουσιν, ἀλλ᾽ οὐ ταῖς τὰ
μέρη κατανειμαμέναις αὐτοῦ, διὰ μεγαλοφροσύνην
ἀξιῶν συμπολιτεύεσθαι· τό τε νόμιμον οὐ παρέβη
αἰδοῖ τῶν θεῶν, καίτοι τἆλλα πατῶν καὶ παραχαράττων·
αὑτόν [D] τε οὐκ ἐπανήγαγεν, ὄθεν
ἄσμενος ἠλευθέρωτο. τί δ᾽ ἦν τοῦτο; τὸ πόλεως
μιᾶς δουλεῦσαι νόμοις ἑαυτόν τε ὑποθεῖναι τούτῳ,
ὅπερ ἦν ἀνάγκη παθεῖν Ἀθηναίῳ γενομένῳ. πῶς
γὰρ οὐκ ἔμελλεν ὁ τῶν θεῶν ἕνεκεν εἰς Ὀλυμπίαν
βαδίζων, ὁ τῷ Πυθίῳ πεισθεὶς καὶ φιλοσοφήσας
ὥσπερ Σωκράτης· φησὶ γὰρ καὶ αὐτὸς εἶναι
Πύθιον οἴκοι παρ᾽ ἑαυτῷ, ὅθεν αὐτῷ καὶ ἡ ὁρμὴ
<pb n='160'/><anchor id='Pg160'/><anchor id='Pg161'/>
πρὸς φιλοσοφίαν ἐγένετο· [239] παριέναι τῶν ἀνακτόρων
εἴσω καὶ μάλα ἀσμένως, εἰ μὴ τοῦτο ἐξέκλινε
τὸ ὑποθεῖναι νόμοις ἑαυτὸν καὶ δοῦλον ἀποφῆναι
πολιτείας; ἀλλὰ διὰ τί μὴ ταύτην αὐτὴν εἶπε τὴν
αἰτίαν, ἐκ τῶν ἐναντίων δὲ τὴν παραιρουμένην οὐ
σμικρὰ τῆς τῶν μυστηρίων σεμνότητος; ἴσως μὲν
ἄν τις τὰ τοιαῦτα καὶ Πυθαγόρᾳ μάλιστα ἐπισκήψειεν,
οὐκ ὀρθῶς λογιζόμενος. οὔτε γὰρ ῥητέον
πάντα ἐστίν, αὐτῶν τε οἶμαι τούτων, ὧν θέμις
φάναι, ἔνια πρὸς τοὺς πολλοὺς σιωπητέον εἶναί
μοι φαίνεται. [B] φανερὰ δὲ ὅμως ἐστὶ καὶ τούτων ἡ
αἰτία. κατανοήσας γὰρ ἀμελοῦντα μὲν τῆς περὶ
τὸν βίον ὀρθότητος, ἐπὶ δὲ τῷ μεμυῆσθαι μέγα
φρονοῦντα<note place='foot'>μέγα φρονοῦντα Cobet, μεγαλοφρονοῦντα Hertlein, MSS.</note> τὸν παραινοῦντα αὐτῷ τοιαῦτα, σωφρονίζων
ἅμα καὶ διδάσκων αὐτόν, ὅτι τοῖς<note place='foot'>τοῖς Naber, τούτοις Hertlein, MSS.</note> μέν,
οἷς ἀξίως τοῦ μυηθῆναι βεβίωται, καὶ μὴ μυηθεῖσιν
οἱ θεοὶ [C] τὰς ἀμοιβὰς ἀκεραίους φυλάττουσι,
τοῖς δὲ μοχθηροῖς οὐδέν ἐστι πλέον, κἂν εἴσω τῶν
ἱερῶν εἰσφρήσωσι περιβόλων. ἢ γὰρ οὐ ταῦτα
καὶ ὁ ἱεροφάντης προαγορεύει, ὅστις χεῖρα μὴ
καθαρὸς καὶ ὅντινα μὴ χρή, τούτοις ἀπαγορεύων
μὴ μυεῖσθαι;
</p>

<p>
(And do not try to frighten me by bringing forward
Diogenes as a sort of bogey. He was never initiated,
they tell us, and replied to some one who once
advised him to be initiated: <q>It is absurd of you,
my young friend, to think that any tax-gatherer,
if only he be initiated, can share in the rewards
of the just in the next world, while Agesilaus and
Epameinondas are doomed to lie in the mire.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Diogenes Laertius</hi> 6. 39.</note>
Now this, my young friend, is a very hard saying
and, I am persuaded, calls for more profound
discussion. May the goddesses themselves grant us
understanding thereof! Though indeed I think that
has already been bestowed by them. For it is
evident that Diogenes was not impious, as you aver,
but resembled those philosophers whom I mentioned
a moment ago. For having regard to the circumstances
in which his lot was cast, and next paying
heed to the commands of the Pythian god, and
knowing that the candidate for initiation must
first be registered as an Athenian citizen, and if
he be not an Athenian by birth must first become
one by law, it was this he avoided, not initiation,
because he considered that he was a citizen of the
world; and moreover such was the greatness of his
soul that he thought he ought to associate himself
with the divine nature of all the gods who in
common govern the whole universe, and not only
with those whose functions are limited to certain
portions of it. And out of reverence for the gods he
did not transgress their laws, though he trampled on
all other opinions and tried to give a new stamp to
the common currency. And he did not return to
that servitude from which he had joyfully been
released. What servitude do I mean? I mean that
he would not enslave himself to the laws of a single
city and submit himself to all that must needs befall
one who had become an Athenian citizen. For is it
likely that a man who in order to honour the gods
journeyed to Olympia, and like Socrates embraced
philosophy in obedience to the Pythian oracle,&mdash;for
he says himself that at home and in private he received
the commands of that oracle and hence came
his impulse to philosophy<note place='foot'>Diogenes like Socrates claimed that he had a δαιμόνιον, a
private revelation to guide his conduct; cf. 212 <hi rend='smallcaps'>d</hi>.</note>&mdash;is it likely I say that such
a man would not very gladly have entered the temples
of the gods but for the fact that he was trying
to avoid submitting himself to any set of laws and
making himself the slave of any one constitution?
But why, you will say, did he not assign this reason,
but on the contrary a reason that detracted not a
little from the dignity of the Mysteries? Perhaps
one might bring this same reproach against Pythagoras
as well, but the reasoning would be incorrect. For
everything ought not to be told, nay more, even of
those things that we are permitted to declare, some,
it seems to me, we ought to refrain from uttering to
the vulgar crowd.<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Oration</hi> 4. 148 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a</hi>, note.</note> However the explanation in this
case is obvious. For since he perceived that the
man who exhorted him to be initiated neglected to
regulate his own life aright, though he prided himself
on having been initiated, Diogenes wished at the
same time to reform his morals and to teach him
that the gods reserve their rewards without stint for
those whose lives have earned them the right to be
initiated, even though they have not gone through
the ceremony, whereas the wicked gain nothing by
penetrating within the sacred precincts. For this is
what the hierophant proclaims, when he refuses the
rite of initiation to him <q>whose hands are not pure
or who for any reason ought not!<note place='foot'>This was the πρόρρησις or praefatio sacrorum; cf. Livy
45. 5.</note></q>)
</p>

<p>
Τί πέρας ἡμῖν ἔσται τῶν λόγων, εἰ ταῦτα μήπω
σε πείθει;
</p>

<p>
(But where would this discourse end if you are
still unconvinced by what I have said?)
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='165'/><anchor id='Pg165'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Oration VIII</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Introduction to Oration VIII</head>

<p>
The Eighth Oration is a <q>speech of consolation</q>
(παραμυθητικὸς λόγος), a familiar type of Sophistic
composition. In consequence of the attacks on
Sallust by sycophants at court, and moreover jealous
of his friendship with Julian, Constantius ordered
him to leave Gaul. In this discourse, which was
written before the open rupture with Constantius,
Julian alludes only once and respectfully to his
cousin. But Asmus thinks he can detect in it a
general resemblance to the Thirteenth Oration of
Dio Chrysostom, where Dio tries to comfort himself
for his banishment by the tyrant Domitian, and that
Sallust was expected to appreciate this and the
veiled attack on Constantius. Julian addresses the
discourse to himself, but it was no doubt sent to
Sallust.
</p>

<p>
After Julian's accession Sallust was made prefect
in 362 and consul in 363. He was the author of
a manifesto of Neo-Platonism, the treatise <hi rend='italic'>On the
Gods and the World</hi>, and to him was dedicated
Julian's Fourth Oration.<note place='foot'>cf. vol. i. p. 351.</note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='166'/><anchor id='Pg166'/><anchor id='Pg167'/>

<div>

<p>
ΙΟΥΛΙΑΝΟΥ ΚΑΙΣΑΡΟΣ
</p>

<p>
(Julian, Emperor)
</p>

<p>
[240] ΕΠΙ ΤΗΙ ΕΞΟΔΩΙ ΤΟΥ ΑΓΑΘΩΤΑΤΟΥ ΣΑΛΟΥΣΤΙΟΥ
ΠΑΡΑΜΥΘΗΤΙΚΟΣ ΕΙΣ ΕΑΥΤΟΝ
</p>

<p>
(A Consolation to Himself
Upon The Departure of
the Excellent Sallust)
</p>

<p>
Ἁλλ᾽ εἰ μὴ καὶ πρὸς σὲ διαλεχθείην ὅσα πρὸς
ἐμαυτὸν διελέχθην, ἐπειδή σε βαδίζειν ἐπυθόμην
χρῆναι παρ᾽ ἡμῶν, ἔλαττον ἔχειν οἰήσομαι πρὸς
παραψυχήν, ὦ φίλε ἑταῖρε, μᾶλλον δὲ οὐδὲ τὴν
ἀρχὴν πεπορίσθαι τινὰ ῥᾳστώνην ἐμαυτῷ νομιῶ,
ἧς σοί γε οὐ μεταδέδωκα. [B] κοινωνήσαντας γὰρ
ἡμᾶς ἀλλήλοις πολλῶν μὲν ἀλγεινῶν, πολλῶν
δὲ ἡδέων ἔργων τε καὶ λόγων, ἐν πράγμασιν ἰδίοις
τε καὶ δημοσίοις, οἴκοι καὶ ἐπὶ στρατοπέδου,
κοινὸν<note place='foot'>κοινὸν Wright, καινὸν Hertlein, MSS.</note> εὑρίσκεσθαι χρὴ τῶν παρόντων, ὁποῖά
ποτ᾽ ἂν ᾖ, παιώνιον ἄκος. ἀλλὰ τίς ἂν ἡμῖν ἢ
τὴν Ὀρφέως μιμήσαιτο<note place='foot'>ἂν&mdash;μιμήσαιτο Hertlein suggests, μιμήσεται MSS.</note> λύραν ἢ τοῖς Σειρήνων
ἀντηχήσειε<note place='foot'>ἀντηχήσειε Hertlein suggests, ἀντηχήσει MSS.</note> μέλεσιν ἢ τὸ νηπενθὲς ἐξεύροι
φάρμακον; εἴτε λόγος ἦν ἐκεῖνο πλήρης Αἰγυπτίων
διηγημάτων, εἴθ᾽ ὅπερ αὐτὸς ἐποίησεν,
ἐν τοῖς ἑπομένοις [C] ἐνυφήνας τὰ Τρωικὰ πάθη,
τοῦτο τῆς Ἑλένης παρ᾽ Αἰγυπτίων μαθούσης, οὐχ
ὅσα Ἕλληνες καὶ Τρῶες ἀλλήλους ἔδρασαν, ἀλλὰ
ποταποὺς εἶναι χρὴ τοὺς λόγους, οἳ τὰς μὲν
<pb n='168'/><anchor id='Pg168'/><anchor id='Pg169'/>
ἀλγηδόνας ἀφαιρήσουσι τῶν ψυχῶν, εὐφροσύνης
δὲ καὶ γαλήνης αἴτιοι καταστήσονται. καὶ γάρ
πως ἔοικεν ἡδονὴ καὶ λύπη τῆς αὐτῆς κορυφῆς
ἐξῆφθαι καὶ παρὰ [241] μέρος ἀλλήλαις ἀντιμεθίστασθαι.
τῶν προσπιπτόντων δὲ καὶ τὰ λίαν
ἐργώδη φασὶν οἱ σοφοὶ τῷ νοῦν ἔχοντι φέρειν
οὐκ ἀλάττονα τῆς δυσκολίας τὴν εὐπάθειαν, ἐπεὶ
καὶ τὴν μέλιτταν ἐκ τῆς δριμυτάτης πόας τῆς
περὶ τὸν Ὕμηττὸν φυομένης γλυκεῖαν ἀνιμᾶσθαι
δρόσον καὶ τοῦ μέλιτος εἶναι δημιουργόν. ἀλλὰ
καὶ τῶν σωμάτων ὅσα μὲν ὑγιεινὰ καὶ ῥωμαλέα
καθέστηκεν, [B] ὑπὸ τῶν τυχόντων τρέφεται σιτίων,
καὶ τὰ δυσχερῆ δοκοῦντα πολλάκις ἐκείνοις οὐκ
ἀβλαβῆ μόνον, ἀλλὰ καὶ τῆς ἰσχύος αἴτια
γέγονεν· ὅσοις δὲ πονηρῶς ἔχει φύσει καὶ τροφῆς
καὶ ἐπιτηδεύσει τὸ σῶμα, τὸν πάντα βίον νοσηλευομένοις,
τούτοις καὶ τὰ κουφότατα βαρυτάτας
εἴωθε προστιθέναι βλάβας. οὐκοῦν καὶ τῆς διανοίας
ὅσοι μὲν οὕτως ἐπεμελήθησαν, ὡς μὴ
παμπονήρως ἔχειν, ἀλλ᾽ ὑγιαίνειν μετρίως, εἰ
καὶ μὴ κατὰ τὴν Ἀντισθένους καὶ Σωκράτους
ῥώμην μηδὲ [C] τὴν Καλλισθένους ἀνδρείαν μηδὲ
τὴν Πολέμωνος ἀπάθειαν, ἀλλ᾽ ὥστε δύνασθαι
τὸ μέτριον ἐν τοῖς τοιούτοις αἱρεῖσθαι, τυχὸν ἂν
καὶ ἐν δυσκολωτέροις εὐφραίνοιντο.
</p>

<p>
(Ah, my beloved comrade, unless I tell you all
that I said to myself when I learned that you were
compelled to journey far from my side, I shall think
I am deprived of some comfort; or rather, I shall
consider that I have not even begun to procure some
assuagement for my grief unless I have first shared
it with you. For we two have shared in many
sorrows and also in many pleasant deeds and words,
in affairs private and public, at home and in the
field, and therefore for the present troubles, be they
what they may, we must needs discover some cure,
some remedy that both can share.
But who will imitate for us the lyre of Orpheus,
who will echo for us the songs of the Sirens or discover
the drug nepenthe?<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Odyssey</hi> 4. 227; a sophistic commonplace; cf. 412 <hi rend='smallcaps'>d</hi>,
Themistius 357 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a</hi>; Julian seems to mean that the nepenthe
was not really a drug but a story told by Helen.</note> Though that was perhaps
some tale full of Egyptian lore or such a tale as the
poet himself invented, when in what follows he wove
in the story of the sorrows of the Trojans, and Helen
had learned it from the Egyptians; I do not mean
a tale of all the woes that the Greeks and Trojans
inflicted on one another, but rather tales such as
they must be that will dispel the griefs of men's
souls and have power to restore cheerfulness and
calm. For pleasure and pain, methinks, are connected
at their source<note place='foot'>Plato, <hi rend='italic'>Phaedo</hi> 60 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b</hi>.</note> and succeed each other in
turn. And philosophers assert that in all that befalls
the wise man the very greatest trials afford him as
much felicity as vexation; and thus, as they say,
does the bee extract sweet dew from the bitterest
herb that grows on Hymettus and works it into
honey.<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Oration</hi> 2. 101 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a</hi>.</note> Even so bodies that are naturally healthy
and robust are nourished by any kind of food, and
food that often seems unwholesome for others, far
from injuring them, makes them strong. On the
other hand, the slightest causes usually inflict very
serious injuries on persons who by nature or nurture,
or owing to their habits, have an unsound constitution
and are lifelong invalids. Just so with regard
to the mind: those who have so trained it that it is
not altogether unhealthy but moderately sound,
though it do not indeed exhibit the vigour of
Antisthenes or Socrates, or the courage of Callisthenes,
or the imperturbability of Polemon, but so
that it can under the same conditions as theirs adopt
the golden mean, they, I say, will probably be able
to remain cheerful in more trying conditions.)
</p>

<p>
Ἐγώ τοι καὶ αὐτὸς πεῖραν ἐμαυτοῦ λαμβάνων,
ὅπως πρὸς τὴν σὴν πορείαν ἔχω τε καὶ ἕξω,
τοσοῦτον ὠδυνήθην, ὅσον ὅτε πρῶτον τὸν ἐμαυτοῦ
καθηγεμόνα κατέλιπον οἴκοι· πάντων γὰρ ἀθρόως
εἰσῄει με μνήμη, τῆς τῶν πόνων κοινωνίας, ὧν
ἀλλήλοις συνδιηνέγκαμεν, τῆς ἀπλάστου καὶ
<pb n='170'/><anchor id='Pg170'/><anchor id='Pg171'/>
καθαρᾶς ἐντεύξεως, [D] τῆς ἀδόλου καὶ δικαίας
ὁμιλίας, τῆς ἐν ἅπασι τοῖς καλοῖς κοινοπραγίας,
τῆς πρὸς τοὺς πονηροὺς ἰσορρόπου τε καὶ ἀμεταμελήτου
προθυμίας τε καὶ ὁρμῆς, ὡς μετ᾽
ἀλλήλων ἔστημεν πολλάκις ἶσον θυμὸν ἔχοντες,
ὁμότροποι καὶ ποθεινοὶ φίλοι. πρὸς δὲ αὖ τούτοις
εἰσῄει με μνήμη τοῦ ΟἸώθη δ᾽ Ὀδυσεύς· εἰμὶ
γὰρ ἐγὼ νῦν ἐκείνῳ παραπλήσιοδςσ, ἐπεὶ σὲ μὲν
κατὰ τὸν Ἕκτορα θεὸς ἐξήγαγεν ἔξω βελῶν,
ὧν οἱ συκοφάνται [242] πολλάκις ἀφῆκαν ἐπὶ σέ,
μᾶλλον δὲ εἰς ἐμέ, διὰ σοῦ τρῶσαι βουλόμενοι,
ταύτῃ με μόνον ἁλώσιμον ὑπολαμβάνοντες, εἰ
τοῦ πιστοῦ φίλου καὶ προθύμου συνασπιστοῦ
καὶ πρὸς τοὺς κινδύνους ἀπροφασίστου κοινωνοῦ
τῆς συνουσίας στερήσειαν. οὐ μὴν ἔλαττον οἶμαί
σε διὰ τοῦτο ἀλγεῖν ἢ ἐγὼ νῦν, ὅτι σοι τῶν
πόνων καὶ τῶν κινδύνων ἔλαττον μέτεστιν, [B] ἀλλὰ
καὶ πλέον ὑπὲρ ἐμοῦ δεδιέναι καὶ τῆς ἐμῆς
κεφαλῆς, μή τι πάθῃ. καὶ γάρ τοι καὶ αὐτὸς
οὐκ ἐν δευτέρῳ τῶν ἐμὼν ἐθέμην τὰ σά, καὶ σοῦ
δὲ ὁμοίως ἔχοντος πρὸς ἡμᾶς ᾐσθόμην. ὅθεν
εἰκότως καὶ μάλα δάκνομαι, ὅτι σοι, τῶν ἄλλων
ἕνεκα λέγειν δυναμένῳ
</p>

<p>
(For my part, when I put myself to the proof to
find out how I am and shall be affected by your
departure, I felt the same anguish as when at home
I first left my preceptor.<note place='foot'>Mardonius.</note> For everything flashed
across my mind at once; the labours that we shared
and endured together; our unfeigned and candid
conversation; our innocent and upright intercourse;
our co-operation in all that was good; our equally-matched
and never-repented zeal and eagerness in
opposing evildoers. How often we supported each
other with one equal temper!<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Iliad</hi> 17. 720.</note> How alike were our
ways! How precious our friendship! Then too
there came into my mind the words, <q>Then was
Odysseus left alone.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Iliad</hi> 11. 401.</note> For now I am indeed like
him, since the god has removed you, like Hector,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Iliad</hi> 11. 163.</note>
beyond the range of the shafts which have so often
been aimed at you by sycophants, or rather at me,
since they desired to wound me through you; for
they thought that only thus should I be vulnerable
if they should deprive me of the society of a faithful
friend and devoted brother-in-arms&mdash;one who never
on any pretext failed to share the dangers that
threatened me. Moreover the fact that you now
have a smaller share than I in such labours and
dangers does not, I think, make your grief less than
mine; but you feel all the more anxiety for me and
any harm that may befall my person.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Iliad</hi> 17. 242.</note> For even as I
never set your interests second to mine, so have I ever
found you equally well disposed towards me. I am
therefore naturally much chagrined that to you who
with regard to all others can say,)
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<lg>
<l>Οὐδὲν μέλει μοι· τἀμὰ γὰρ καλῶς ἔχει,</l>
<l>Μόνος εἰμὶ [C] λύπης αἴτιος καὶ φροντίδος.<note place='foot'>μόνος&mdash;φροντίδος Brambs regards as a verse; Hertlein
prints as prose.</note></l>
</lg>

<p>
(<q>I heed them not,
for my affairs are prosperous,</q><note place='foot'>Nauck, <hi rend='italic'>Adespota fragmenta</hi> 430.</note> I alone occasion sorrow
and anxiety.)
</p>

</quote>

<p>
ἀλλὰ τούτου μὲν ἐξ ἴσης, ὡς ἔοικε, κοινωνοῦμεν,
σὺ μὲν ὑπὲρ ἡμῶν ἀλγῶν μόνον, ἐγὼ δὲ ἀεὶ ποθῶν
τὴν σὴν συνουσίαν καὶ τῆς φιλίας μεμνημένος,
ἣν ἐκ τῆς ἀρετῆς μὲν μάλιστα καὶ προηγουμένως,
<pb n='172'/><anchor id='Pg172'/><anchor id='Pg173'/>
ἔπειτα καὶ διὰ τὴν χρείαν, ἣν ἐγὼ μὲν σοί, σὺ
δὲ ἐμοὶ συνεχῶς παρέσχες, ἀνακραθέντες ἀλλήλοις
ὡμολογήσαμεν, οὐχ ὅρκοις οὐδὲ τοιαύταις ἀνάγκαις
ταῦτα πιστούμενοι, [D] ὥσπερ ὁ Θησεὺς καὶ
ὁ Πειρίθους, ἀλλ᾽ ἐξ ὧν ἀεὶ ταὐτὰ νοοῦντες καὶ
προαιρούμενοι κακὸν μὲν δοῦναι τῶν πολιτῶν
τινι τοσοῦτον δέω λέγειν ἀπέσχομεν, ὥστε οὐδὲ
ἐβουλευσάμεθά ποτε μετὰ ἀλλήλων· χρηστὸν δὲ
εἴ τι γέγονεν ἢ βεβούλευται κοινῇ παρ᾽ ἡμῶν,
τοῦτο ἄλλοις εἰπεῖν μελήσει.
</p>

<p>
(However this sorrow it seems we
share equally, though you grieve only on my account,
while I constantly feel the lack of your society and
call to mind the friendship that we pledged to one
another&mdash;that friendship which we ever cemented
afresh, based as it was, first and foremost, on virtue,
and secondly on the obligations which you continually
conferred on me and I on you. Not by
oaths or by any such ties did we ratify it, like
Theseus and Peirithous, but by being of the same
mind and purpose, in that so far from forbearing to
inflict injury on any citizen, we never even debated
any such thing with one another. But whether
anything useful was done or planned by us in
common, I will leave to others to say.)
</p>

<p>
Ὡς μὲν οὖν εἰκότως ἀλγῶ τοῖς παροῦσιν, οὐ
φίλου μόνον, ἀλλὰ καὶ συνεργοῦ πιστοῦ, [243] δοίη δὲ ὁ
δαίμων, καὶ πρὸς ὀλίγον ἀπαλλαττόμενος, οἶμαι
καὶ Σωκράτη τὸν μέγαν τῆς ἀρετῆς κήρυκα καὶ
διδάσκαλον ἔμοιγε συνομολογήσειν ἐξ ὧν ἐκεῖνον
γνωρίζομεν, λέγω δὲ τῶν Πλάτωνος λόγων,
τεκμαιρόμενος ὑπὲρ αὐτοῦ. φησὶ γοῦν ὅτι Χαλεπώτερον
ἐφαίνετό μοι ὀρθῶς τὰ πολιτικὰ διοικεῖν·
οὔτε γὰρ ἄνευ φίλων ἀνδρῶν καὶ ἑταίρων πιστῶν
οἷόν τε εἶναι πράττειν, οὔτ᾽ εὐπορεῖν τούτων
ξὺν πολλῇ ῥᾳστώνῃ. καίτοι τοῦτό γε εἰ Πλάτωνι
μεῖζον ἐφαίνετο τοῦ διορύττειν [B] τὸν Ἄθω, τί
χρὴ προσδοκᾶν ἡμᾶς ὑπὲρ αὐτοῦ τοὺς πλέον
ἀπολειπομένους τῆς ἐκείνου συνέσεώς τε καὶ
γνώμης ἢ ἐκεῖνος τοῦ θεοῦ; ἐμοὶ δὲ οὐδὲ τῆς χρείας
μόνον ἕνεκα, ἣν ἀντιδιδόντες ἀλλήλοις ἐν τῇ
πολιτείᾳ ῥᾷον εἴχομεν πρὸς τὰ παρὰ γνώμην ὑπὸ
τῆς τύχης καὶ τῶν ἀντιταττομένων ἡμῖν πραττόμενα,
ἀλλὰ<note place='foot'>ἀλλὰ Reiske supplies, lacuna Hertlein: after πραττόμενα
several words are lost.</note> καὶ τῆς μόνης ἀεί μοι θαλπωρῆς τε
<pb n='174'/><anchor id='Pg174'/><anchor id='Pg175'/>
καὶ τέρψεως [C] ἐνδεὴς οὐκ εἰς μακρὰν ἔσεσθαι
μέλλων, εἰκότως δάκνομαί τε καὶ δέδηγμαι τὴν
ἐμαυτοῦ καρδίαν. ἐς τίνα γὰρ οὕτως ἔσται μοι
λοιπὸν εὔνουν ἀποβλέψαι φίλον; τίνος δὲ ἀνασχέσθαι
τῆς ἀδόλου καὶ καθαρᾶς παρρησίας; τίς
δὲ ἡμῖν συμβουλεύσει μὲν ἐμφρόνως, ἐπιτιμήσει
δὲ μετ᾽ εὐνοίας, ἐπιρρώσει δὲ πρὸς τὰ καλὰ χωρὶς
αὐθαδείας καὶ τύφου, παρρησιάσεται δὲ τὸ πικρὸν
ἀφελὼν τῶν λόγων, [D] ὥσπερ οἱ τῶν φαρμάκων
ἀφαιροῦντες μὲν τὸ λίαν δυσχερές, ἀπολείποντες
δὲ αὐτὸ τὸ χρήσιμον; ἀλλὰ τοῦτο μὲν ἐκ τῆς σῆς
φιλίας ὄφελος ἐκαρπωσάμην. τοσούτων δὲ ὁμοῦ
ἐστερημένος, τίνων ἂν εὐπορήσαιμι λόγων, οἵ με,
διὰ τὸν σὸν πόθον σά τε μήδεα σήν τε ἀγανοφροσύνην
αὐτὴν προέσθαι τὴν ψυχὴν κινδυνεύοντα,
πείσουσιν ἀτρεμεῖν καὶ φέρειν ὅσα δέδωκεν ὁ θεὸς
γενναίως; [244] εἰς ταὐτὸ γὰρ ἔοικεν αὐτῷ νοῶν ὁ μέγας
αὐτοκράτωρ ταῦθ᾽ οὕτω νυνὶ βουλεύσασθαι. τί
ποτε οὖν ἄρα χρὴ διανοηθέντα καὶ τίνας ἐπῳδὰς
εὑρόντα πεῖσαι πρᾴως ἔχειν ὑπὸ τοῦ πάθους θορυβουμένην
τὴν ψυχήν; ἆρα ἡμῖν οἱ Ζαμόλξιδός
εἰσι μιμητέοι λόγοι, λέγω δὲ τὰς ἐκ Θρᾴκης
ἐπῳδάς, ἃς Ἀθήναζε φέρων ὁ Σωκράτης πρὸ τοῦ
τὴν ὀδύνην ἰᾶσθαι τῆς κεφαλῆς ἐπᾴδειν ἠξίου τῷ
καλῷ Χαρμίδῃ; ἢ τούτους μὲν ἅτε δὴ μείζονας
καὶ περὶ μειζόνων οὐ κινητέον, ὥσπερ ἐν θεάτρῳ
<pb n='176'/><anchor id='Pg176'/><anchor id='Pg177'/>
μικρῷ μηχανὰς μεγάλας, [B] ἀλλ᾽ ἐκ τῶν ἔμπροσθεν
ἔργων, ὧν ἐπυθόμεθα τὰ κλέα, φησὶν ὁ ποιητῆς,
ὥσπερ ἐκ λειμῶνος δρεψάμενοι ποικίλου καὶ
πολυειδοῦς<note place='foot'>πολυειδοῦς Cobet, πολυτελοῦς Hertlein, MSS.</note> ἄνθη τὰ κάλλιστα ψυχαγωγήσομεν
αὑτοὺς τοῖς διηγήμασι, μικρὰ τῶν ἐκ φιλοσοφίας
αὐτοῖς προστιθέντες; ὥσπερ γὰρ οἶμαι τοῖς λίαν
γλυκέσιν οἱ παρεγχέοντες οὐκ οἶδ᾽ ὁποῖ ἄττα
φάρμακα τὸ προσκορὲς αὐτῶν ἀφαιροῦσιν, οὕτω
τοῖς διηγήμασιν ἐκ φιλοσοφίας ἔνια προστιθέμενα
τὸ δοκεῖν ἐξ [C] ἱστορίας ἀρχαίας ὄχλον ἐπεισάγειν,
οὐδὲν δέον, καὶ περιττὴν ἀδολεσχίαν ἀφαιρεῖται.
</p>

<p>
(Now that it is natural for me to be grieved by the
present event, on being parted for ever so short
a time&mdash;and God grant that it may be short!&mdash;from
one who is not only my friend but my loyal fellow-worker,
I think even Socrates, that great herald and
teacher of virtue, will agree; so far at least as I may
judge from the evidence on which we rely for our
knowledge of him, I mean the words of Plato. At
my rate, what he says is: <q>Ever more difficult did
it seem to me to govern a state rightly. For neither
is it possible to achieve anything without good
friends and loyal fellow-workers, nor is it very easy
to obtain enough of these.</q><note place='foot'>Julian quotes from memory and paraphrases <hi rend='italic'>Epistle</hi>
7. 325 <hi rend='smallcaps'>c</hi>.</note> And if Plato thought
this more difficult than digging a canal through
Mount Athos,<note place='foot'>This feat of Xerxes became a rhetorical commonplace.</note> what must we expect to find it, we
who in wisdom and knowledge are more inferior to
him than he was to God? But it is not only when I
think of the help in the administration that we gave
one another in turn, and which enabled us to bear
more easily all that fate or our opponents brought to
pass contrary to our purpose; but also because I
am destined soon to be bereft also of what has ever
been my only solace and delight, it is natural that I
am and have been cut to the very heart.<note place='foot'>Aristophanes, <hi rend='italic'>Acharnians</hi> 1; cf. 248 <hi rend='smallcaps'>d</hi>.</note> For in the
future to what friend can I turn as loyal as yourself?
With whose guileless and pure frankness shall
I now brace myself? Who now will give me prudent
counsel, reprove me with affection, give me strength
for good deeds without arrogance and conceit, and
use frankness after extracting the bitterness from
the words, like those who from medicines extract
what is nauseating but leave in what is really
beneficial?<note place='foot'>A commonplace; Plato, <hi rend='italic'>Laws</hi> 659 <hi rend='smallcaps'>e</hi>; Julian, <hi rend='italic'>Caesars</hi>
314 <hi rend='smallcaps'>c</hi>; Dio Chrysostom 33. 10; Themistius 63 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b</hi>, 302 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b</hi>;
Maximus of Tyre 10. 6.</note> These are the advantages that I reaped
from your friendship! And now that I have been
deprived of all these all at once, with what arguments
shall I supply myself, so that when I am in
danger of flinging away my life out of regret for
you and your counsels and loving kindness,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Odyssey</hi> 11. 202.</note> they
may persuade me to be calm and to bear nobly
whatever God has sent?<note place='foot'> Demosthenes, <hi rend='italic'>De Corona</hi> 97; cf. Julian, <hi rend='italic'>Epistle</hi> 53. 439 <hi rend='smallcaps'>d</hi>.</note> For in accordance with
the will of God our mighty Emperor has surely
planned this as all else. Then what now must
be my thoughts, what spells must I find to persuade
my soul to bear tranquilly the trouble with
which it is now dismayed? Shall I imitate the
discourses of Zamolxis<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Caesars</hi> 309 <hi rend='smallcaps'>c</hi> note.</note>&mdash;I mean those Thracian
spells which Socrates brought to Athens and declared
that he must utter them over the fair
Charmides before he could cure him of his headache?<note place='foot'>Plato, <hi rend='italic'>Charmides</hi> 156 <hi rend='smallcaps'>d</hi>.</note>
Or must we leave these alone as being,
like large machinery in a small theatre, too lofty for
our purpose and suited to greater troubles; and
rather from the deeds of old whose fame we have
heard told, as the poet says,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Iliad</hi> 9. 524.</note> shall we gather the
fairest flowers as though from a variegated and
many-coloured meadow, and thus console ourselves
with such narratives and add thereto some of the
teachings of philosophy? For just as, for instance,
certain drugs are infused into things that have too
sweet a taste, and thus their cloying sweetness is
tempered, so when tales like these are seasoned by
the maxims of philosophy, we avoid seeming to drag
in a tedious profusion of ancient history and a superfluous
and uncalled-for flow of words.)
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<lg>
<l>Τί πρῶτον; τί δ᾽ ἔπειτα; τί δ᾽ ὑστάτιον καταλέξω;</l>
</lg>

<p>
(<q>What first, what next, what last shall I relate?</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Odyssey</hi> 9. 14.</note>)
</p>

</quote>

<p>
πότερον ὡς ὁ Σκηπίων ἐκεῖνος, ὁ τὸν Λαίλιον
ἀγαπήσας καὶ φιληθεὶς τὸ λεγόμενον ἴσῳ ζυγῷ
παρ᾽ ἐκείνου πάλιν, ἡδέως μὲν αὐτῷ συνῆν,
ἔπραττε δὲ οὐδέν, ὧν μὴ πρότερον ἐκεῖνος πύθοιτο
καὶ φήσειεν εἶναι πρακτέον; ὅθεν οἶμαι καὶ λόγον
παρέσχε [D] τοῖς ὑπὸ φθόνου τὸν Σκηπίωνα λοιδοροῦσιν,
ὡς ποιητὴς μὲν ὁ Λαίλιος εἴη τῶν ἔργων,
Ἁφρικανὸς δὲ ὁ τούτων ὑποκριτής. αὕτη τοι καὶ
ἡμῖν ἡ φήμη πρόσκειται, καὶ οὐ μόνον οὐ δυχεραίνω<note place='foot'>οὐ μόνον οὐ δυσχεραίνω χαίρω δὲ Hertlein suggests, cf.
37 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b</hi>, 255 <hi rend='smallcaps'>d</hi>; καὶ χαίρω γε MSS.</note>
χαίρω δὲ ἐπ᾽ αὐτῇ πλέον. τὸ γὰρ τοῖς
ὀρθῶς ὑπ᾽ ἄλλου γνωσθεῖσι πεισθῆναι μείζονος
ἀρετῆς<note place='foot'>ἀρετῆς Hertlein suggests, τῆς ἀρετῆς MSS.</note> ὁ Ζήνων ποιεῖται γνώρισμα [245] τοῦ γνῶναί
τινα αὐτὸν ἐξ αὑτοῦ τὰ δέοντα, τὴν Ἡσιόδου
μεθαρμόττων ῥῆσιν,
</p>

<p>
(Shall I tell how the famous Scipio, who loved Laelius
and was loved by him in return with equal yoke of
friendship,<note place='foot'>Theocritus 12. 15.</note> as the saying is, not only took pleasure
in his society, but undertook no task without first
consulting with him and obtaining his advice as to
how he should proceed? It was this, I understand,
that furnished those who from envy slandered Scipio
with the saying that Laelius was the real author
of his enterprises, and Africanus merely the actor.
The same remark is made about ourselves, and, far
from resenting this, I rather rejoice at it. For to accept
another's good advice Zeno held to be a sign of
greater virtue than independently to decide oneself
what one ought to do; and so he altered the saying
of Hesiod; for Zeno says:)
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<lg>
<l>Οὗτος μὲν πανάριστος, ὃς εὖ εἰπόντι πίθηται</l>
</lg>

<p>
(<q>That man is best who
follows good advice</q> instead of <q>decides all things
for himself.</q><note place='foot'>Hesiod, <hi rend='italic'>Works and Days</hi> 293, 295 ὃς αὑτῷ πάντα νοήσῃ;
Diogenes Laertius 7. 25.</note>)
</p>

</quote>

<pb n='178'/><anchor id='Pg178'/><anchor id='Pg179'/>

<p>
λέγων ἀντὶ τοῦ νοήσῃ πάνθ᾽ ἑαυτῷ. ἐμοὶ δὲ οὐ
διὰ τοῦτο χαρίεν εἶναι δοκεῖ· πείθομαι γὰρ ἀληθέστερον
μὲν Ἡσίοδον λέγειν, ἀμφοῖν δὲ ἄμεινον
Πυθαγόραν, ὃς καὶ τῇ παροιμίᾳ παρέσχε τὴν
ἀρχὴν καὶ τὸ λέγεσθαι κοινὰ τὰ φίλων ἔδωκε τῷ
βίῳ, οὐ δήπου τὰ χρήματα λέγων μόνον, [B] ἀλλὰ καὶ
τὴν τοῦ νοῦ καὶ τῆς φρονήσεως κοινωνίαν, ὥσθ᾽
ὅσα μὲν εὗρες αὐτός, οὐδὲν ἔλαττον ταῦτα τοῦ
πεισθέντος ἐστίν, ὅσα δὲ τῶν σῶν ὑπεκρινάμην,
τούτων αὐτῶν εἰκότως τὸ ἴσον μετέχεις. ἀλλὰ
ταῦτα μὲν ὁποτέρου μᾶλλον ἂν φαίνηται, καὶ<note place='foot'>καὶ θατέρῳ Hertlein suggests, θατέρῳ MSS.</note>
θατέρῳ προσήκει, καὶ τοῖς βασκάνοις οὐδὲν ἔσται
πλέον ἐκ τῶν λόγων.
</p>

<p>
(Not that the alteration is to my
liking. For I am convinced that what Hesiod says
is truer, that Pythagoras was wiser than either
of them when he originated the proverb and gave
to mankind the maxim, <q>Friends have all things in
common.</q><note place='foot'>Diogenes Laertius 8. 10; Pythagoras persuaded his disciples
to share their property in common.</note> And by this he certainly did not mean
money only, but also a partnership in intelligence
and wisdom. So all that you suggested belongs just
as much to me who adopted it, and whenever I was
the actor who carried out your plans you naturally
have an equal share in the performance. In fact, to
whichever of us the credit may seem to belong, it
belongs equally to the other, and malicious persons
will gain nothing from their gossip.)
</p>

<p>
Ἡμῖν δὲ ἐπανιτέον ἐπὶ τὸν Ἀφρικανὸν καὶ τὸν
Λαίλιον. ἐπειδὴ γὰρ ἀνῄρητο μὲν ἡ Καρχηδὼν
καὶ τὰ περὶ [C] τὴν Λιβύην ἅπαντα τῆς Ῥώμης
ἐγεγόνει δοῦλα, πέμπει μὲν Ἀφρικανὸς τὸν
Λαίλιον· ἀνήγετο δὲ ἐκεῖνος εὐαγγέλια τῇ πατρίδι
φέρων· καὶ ὁ Σκηπίων ἤχθετο μὲν ἀπολειπόμενος
τοῦ φίλου, οὐ μὴν ἀπαραμύθητον αὑτῷ τὸ πάθος
ᾤετο. καὶ τὸν Λαίλιον δὲ δυσχεραίνειν εἰκός,
ἐπειδὴ μόνος ἀνήγετο, οὐ μὴν ἀφόρητον ἐποιεῖτο
τὴν συμφοράν. ἔπλει καὶ Κάτων ἀπολιπὼν οἴκοι
τοὺς αὑτοῦ συνήθεις, καὶ Πυθαγόρας, καὶ Πλάτων
καὶ Δημόκριτος οὐδένα παραλαβόντες κοινωνὸν
τῆς ὁδοῦ, [D] καίτοι πολλοὺς οἴκοι τῶν φιλτάτων
ἀπολιμπάνοντες. ἐστρατεύσατο καὶ Περικλῆς
ἐπὶ τὴν Σάμον οὐκ ἄγων τὸν Ἀναξαγόραν, καὶ τὴν
Εὔβοιαν παρεστήσατο ταῖς μὲν ἐκείνου βουλαῖς,
ἐπεπαίδευτο γὰρ ὑπ᾽ ἐκείνῳ, τὸ σῶμα δὲ οὐκ ἐφελκόμενος
ὥσπερ ἄλλο [246] τι τῶν ἀναγκαίων πρὸς τὰς
<pb n='180'/><anchor id='Pg180'/><anchor id='Pg181'/>
μάχας. καίτοι καὶ τοῦτον ἄκοντα, φασίν, Ἀθηναῖοι
τῆς πρὸς τὸν διδάσκαλον ἀπέστησαν συνουσίας.
ἀλλ᾽ ἔφερεν ὡς ἀνὴρ ἔμφρων ὢν<note place='foot'>ὢν Hertlein would add.</note> τὴν ἄνοιαν τῶν
αὑτοῦ πολιτῶν ἐγκρατῶς καὶ πρᾴως. καὶ γὰρ
ἀνάγκῃ τῇ πατρίδι καθάπερ μητρὶ δικαίως μὲν οὔ,
χαλεπῶς δὲ ὅμως ἐχούσῃ πρὸς τὴν συνουσίαν
αὐτῶν, εἴκειν ᾤετο χρῆναι, ταῦτα, ὡς εἰκός,
λογιζόμενος· ἀκούειν δὲ χρὴ τῶν ἑξῆς ὡς τοῦ
Περικλέους αὐτοῦ· Ἐμοὶ πόλις μέν ἐστι καὶ
πατρὶς ὁ κόσμος, καὶ φίλοι θεοὶ καὶ δαίμονες
καὶ πάντες [B] ὅσοι καὶ ὁπουοῦν<note place='foot'>ὁπουοῦν Cobet, ὅπου Hertlein, MSS.</note> σπουδαῖοι. χρὴ
δὲ καὶ τὴν οὗ<note place='foot'>τὴν οὗ Hertlein suggests, οὗ MSS.</note> γεγόναμεν τιμᾶν, ἐπειδὴ τοῦτο
θεῖός ἐστι νόμος, καὶ πείθεσθαί γε οἷς ἂν ἐπιτάττῃ
καὶ μὴ βιάζεσθαι μηδέ, ὅ φησιν ἡ παροιμία,
πρὸς κέντρα λακτίζειν· ἀπαραίτητον γάρ ἐστι
τὸ λεγόμενον ζυγὸν τῆς ἀνάγκης. οὐ μὴν ὀδυρτέον
οὐδὲ θρηνητέον ἐφ᾽ οἷς ἐπιτάττει τραχύτερον,
ἀλλὰ τὸ πρᾶγμα λογιστέον αὐτό. νῦν ἀπαλλάττεσθαι
τὸν Ἀναξαγόραν ἀφ᾽ ἡμῶν κελεύει, [C] καὶ
τὸν ἄριστον οὐκ ὀψόμεθα τῶν ἑταίρων, δι᾽ ὃν
ἠχθόμην μὲν τῇ νυκτί, ὅτι μοι τὸν φίλον οὐκ
ἐδείκνυεν, ἡμέρᾳ δὲ καὶ ἡλίῳ χάριν ἠπιστάμην,
ὅτι μοι παρεῖχεν ὁρᾶν οὗ μάλιστα ἤρων. ἀλλ᾽
εἰ μὲν ὄμματά σοι δέδωκεν ἡ φύσις, ὦ Περίκλεις,
μόνον ὥσπερ τοῖς θηρίοις<note place='foot'>θηρίοις Cobet, ὄρνισιν Hertlein, MSS.</note>, οὐδὲν ἀπεικός ἐστι
σε διαφερόντως ἄχθεσθαι· [D] εἰ δέ σοι ψυχὴν ἐνέπνευσε
<pb n='182'/><anchor id='Pg182'/><anchor id='Pg183'/>
καὶ νοῦν ἐνῆκεν, ὑφ᾽ οὗ τὰ μὲν πολλὰ
τῶν γεγενημένων καίπερ οὐ παρόντα νῦν ὁρᾷς
διὰ τῆς μνήμης, πολλὰ δὲ καὶ τῶν ἐσομένων
ὁ λογισμὸς ἀνευρίσκων ὥσπερ ὄμμασιν ὁρᾶν
προσβάλλει τῷ νῷ, καὶ τῶν ἐνεστώτων οὐ τὰ
πρὸ τῶν ὀμμάτων ἡ φαντασία μόνον ἀποτυπουμένη
δίδωσιν αὐτῷ κρίνειν καὶ καθορᾶν, ἀλλὰ
καὶ τὰ πόρρω καὶ μυριάσι σταδίων ἀπῳκισμένα
τῶν γενομένων παρὰ πόδα [247] καὶ πρὸ τῶν ὀφθαλμῶν
δείκνυσιν ἐναργέστερον, τί χρὴ τοσοῦτον ἀνιᾶσθαι
καὶ σχετλίως φέρειν; ὅτι δὲ οὐκ ἀμάρτυρος ὁ
λόγος ἐστί μοι,
</p>

<p>
(Let me go back now to Africanus and Laelius.
When Carthage had been destroyed<note place='foot'>Cf. Livy 27. 7.</note> and all Libya
made subject to Rome, Africanus sent Laelius home
and he embarked to carry the good news to their
fatherland. And Scipio was grieved at the
separation from his friend, but he did not think
his sorrow inconsolable. Laelius too was probably
afflicted at having to embark alone, but he did not
regard it as an insupportable calamity. Cato also
made a voyage and left his intimate friends at
home, and so did Pythagoras and Plato and Democritus,
and they took with them no companion on
their travels, though they left behind them at home
many whom they dearly loved. Pericles also set out
on his campaign against Samos without taking
Anaxagoras, and he conquered Euboea by following
the latter's advice, for he had been trained by his
teaching: but the philosopher himself he did not
drag in his train as though he were part of the
equipment needed for battle. And yet in his case
too we are told that much against his will the
Athenians separated him from the society of his
teacher. But wise man that he was, he bore the
folly of his fellow-citizens with fortitude and mildness.
Indeed he thought that he must of necessity
bow to his country's will when, as a mother might,
however unjustly, she still resented their close
friendship; and he probably reasoned as follows.
(You must take what I say next as the very words of
Pericles.<note place='foot'>Cobet rejects this sentence as a gloss; but Julian
perhaps echoes Plato, <hi rend='italic'>Menexenus</hi> 246 C.</note>)
<q rend='pre'>The whole world is my city and fatherland, and
my friends are the gods and lesser divinities and all
good men whoever and wherever they may be. Yet
it is right to respect also the country where I was
born, since this is the divine law, and to obey all her
commands and not oppose them, or as the proverb
says kick against the pricks. For inexorable, as the
saying goes, is the yoke of necessity. But we must
not even complain or lament when her commands
are harsher than usual, but rather consider the
matter as it actually is. She now orders Anaxagoras
to leave me and I shall see no more my best
friend, on whose account the night was hateful to
me because it did not allow me to see my friend,
but I was grateful to daylight and the sun because
they allowed me to see him whom I loved best.<note place='foot'>This a very inappropriate application to Pericles of the
speech of Critoboulos in Xenophon, <hi rend='italic'>Symposium</hi> 4. 12; cf.
Diogenes Laertius 2. 49.</note>
But, Pericles, if nature had given you eyes only as
she has to wild beasts, it would be natural enough
for you to feel excessive grief. But since she has
breathed into you a soul, and implanted in you
intelligence by means of which you now behold in
memory many past events, though they are no longer
before you: and further since your reasoning power
discovers many future events and reveals them as it
were to the eyes of your mind; and again your
imagination sketches for you not only those present
events which are going on under your eyes and
allows you to judge and survey them, but also reveals
to you things at a distance and many thousand
stades<note place='foot'>The Attic stade = about 600 feet.</note> removed more clearly than what is going on
at your feet and before your eyes, what need is
there for such grief and resentment? And to show
that I have authority for what I say,)</q>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<lg>
<l>Νοῦς ὁρῇ καὶ νοῦς ἀκούει</l>
</lg>

<p>
(<q rend='none'><q>The mind
sees and the mind hears,</q></q>)
</p>

</quote>

<p>
φησὶν ὁ Σικελιώτης, οὕτως ὀξὺ χρῆμα καὶ τάχει
χρώμενον ἀμηχάνῳ, ὥσθ᾽ ὅταν τινὰ τῶν δαιμόνων
Ὄμηρος ἐθέλῃ κεχρημένον ἀπίστῳ πορείας ἐπιδεῖξαι
τάχει,
</p>

<p>
(says the Sicilian;<note place='foot'>Epicharmus <hi rend='italic'>fr.</hi> 13.</note>
and mind is a thing so acute and endowed with such
amazing speed that when Homer wishes to show
us one of the gods employing incredible speed in
travelling he says:)
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<lg>
<l>Ὡς δ᾽ ὅτ᾽ ἂν ἀΐξῃ νόος ἀνέρος</l>
</lg>

<p>
(<q rend='none'><q>As when the mind of a man
darts swiftly.</q></q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Iliad</hi> 15. 80.</note>)
</p>

</quote>

<p>
φησί. [B] τούτῳ τοι χρώμενος ῥᾷστα μὲν Ἀθήνηθεν
ὄψει τὸν ἐν Ἰωνίᾳ, ῥᾷστα δὲ ἐκ Κελτῶν τὸν ἐν
Ἰλλυριοῖς καὶ Θρᾴκῃ, καὶ τὸν ἐν Κελτοῖς ἐκ
Θρᾴκης καὶ Ἰλλυριῶν. καὶ γὰρ οὐδ᾽, ὥσπερ τοῖς
φυτοῖς οὐκ ἔνι σώζεσθαι τὴν συνήθη χώραν μεταβάλλουσιν,
ὅταν ἡ τῶν ὡρῶν ᾖ κράσις ἐναντία,
καὶ τοῖς ἀνθρώποις συμβαίνει τόπον ἐκ τόπου
μεταβάλλουσιν ἢ διαφθείρεσθαι παντελῶς ἢ τὸν
τρόπον ἀμείβειν καὶ μετατίθεσθαι περὶ ὧν ὀρθῶς
πρόσθεν ἐγνώκεσαν. [C] οὔκουν οὐδὲ τὴν εὔνοιαν
ἀμβλυτέραν ἔχειν εἰκός, εἰ μὴ καὶ μᾶλλον ἀγαπᾶν
<pb n='184'/><anchor id='Pg184'/><anchor id='Pg185'/>
καὶ στέργειν· ἕπεται γὰρ ὕβρις μὲν κόρῳ, ἔρως
δὲ ἐνδείᾳ. καὶ ταύτῃ τοίνυν ἕξομεν βέλτιον,
ἐπιτεινομένης ἡμῖν τῆς πρὸς ἀλλήλους εὐνοίας,
καθέξομέν τε ἀλλήλους ἐν ταῖς ἑαυτῶν διανοίαις
ἱδρυμένους ὥσπερ ἀγάλματα. καὶ νῦν μὲν ἐγὼ
τὸν Ἀναξαγόραν, αὖθις δὲ ἐκεῖνος ὄψεται ἐμέ·
κωλύει δὲ οὐδὲν [D] καὶ ἅμα βλέπειν ἀλλήλους,
οὐχὶ σαρκία καὶ νεῦρα καὶ μορφῆς τύπωμα,
στέρνα τε ἐξεικασμένα πρὸς ἀρχέτυπον σώματος·
καίτοι καὶ τοῦτο κωλύει τυχὸν οὐδὲν ταῖς διανοίαις
ἡμῶν ἐμφαίνεσθαι· ἀλλ᾽ εἰς τὴν ἀρετὴν καὶ τὰς
πράξεις καὶ τοὺς λόγους καὶ τὰς ὁμιλίας καὶ
τὰς ἐντεύξεις, ἃς πολλάκις ἐποιησάμεθα μετ᾽
ἀλλήλων, οὐκ ἀμούσως ὑμνοῦντες παιδείαν καὶ
δικαιοσύνην καὶ τὸν ἐπιτροπεύοντα νοῦν τὰ
θνητὰ καὶ τὰ ἀνθρώπινα, [248] καὶ περὶ πολιτείας καὶ
νόμων καὶ τρόπων ἀρετῆς καὶ χρηστῶν ἐπιτηδευμάτων
διεξιόντες, ὅσα γε ἡμῖν ἐπῄει<note place='foot'>ἐπῄει Reiske adds.</note> ἐν καιρῷ
τούτων μεμνημένοις. ταῦτα ἐννοοῦντες, τούτοις
τρεφόμενοι τοῖς εἰδώλοις τυχὸν οὐκ ὀνείρων
νυκτέρων<note place='foot'>νυκτέρων Cobet, νυκτερινῶν Hertlein, MSS.</note> ἰνδάλμασι προσέξομεν οὐδὲ κενὰ καὶ
μάταια προσβαλεῖ τῷ νῷ φαντάσματα πονηρῶς
ὑπὸ τῆς τοῦ σώματος κράσεως αἴσθησις διακειμένη.
οὐδὲ γὰρ αὐτὴν παραληψόμεθα τὴν αἴσθησιν
ὑπουργεῖν ἡμῖν καὶ ὑπηρετεῖσθαι· [B] ἀλλ᾽
ἀποφυγὼν αὐτὴν ὁ νοῦς ἐμμελετήσει τούτοις
πρὸς κατανόησιν καὶ συνεθισμὸν τῶν ἀσωμάτων
<pb n='186'/><anchor id='Pg186'/><anchor id='Pg187'/>
διεγειρόμενος· νῷ γὰρ δὴ καὶ τῷ κρείττονι σύνεσμεν,
καὶ τὰ τὴν αἴσθησιν ἀποφυγόντα καὶ
διεστηκότα τῷ τόπῳ, μᾶλλον δὲ οὐδὲ δεόμενα
τόπου ὁρᾶν τε καὶ αἱρεῖν πεφύκαμεν, ὅσοις ἀξίως
βεβίωται τῆς τοιαύτης θέας, ἐννοοῦντες αὐτὴν καὶ
συναπτόμενοι.
</p>

<p>
(<q rend='post'>So if you employ your mind you
will easily from Athens see one who is in Ionia;
and from the country of the Celts one who is in
Illyria or Thrace; and from Thrace or Illyria one
who is in the country of the Celts. And moreover,
though plants if removed from their native soil when
the weather and the season are unfavourable cannot
be kept alive, it is not so with men, who can remove
from one place to another without completely deteriorating
or changing their character and deviating
from the right principles that they had before
adopted. It is therefore unlikely that our affection
will become blunted, if indeed we do not love and
cherish each other the more for the separation. For
<q>wantonness attends on satiety,</q><note place='foot'>Theognis 153. τίκτει τοι κόρος ὕβριν, ὅταν κακῷ ὄλβος
ἔπηται.</note> but love and longing
on want. So in this respect we shall be better
off if our affection tends to increase, and we shall
keep one another firmly set in our minds like holy
images. And one moment I shall see Anaxagoras,
and the next he will see me. Though nothing
prevents our seeing one another at the same instant;
I do not mean our flesh and sinews and <q>bodily
outline and breasts in the likeness</q><note place='foot'>Euripides, <hi rend='italic'>Phoenissae</hi> 165, μορφῆς τύπωμα στέρνα τ᾽
ἐξῃκασμένα.</note> of the bodily
original&mdash;though perhaps there is no reason why
these too should not become visible to our minds&mdash;but
I mean our virtue, our deeds and words, our
intercourse, and those conversations which we so
often held with one another, when in perfect
harmony we sang the praises of education and
justice and mind that governs all things mortal and
human: when too we discussed the art of government,
and law, and the different ways of being
virtuous and the noblest pursuits, everything in
short that occurred to us when, as occasion served,
we mentioned these subjects. If we reflect on these
things and nourish ourselves with these images, we
shall probably pay no heed to the <q>visions of dreams
in the night,</q><note place='foot'>Nauck, <hi rend='italic'>Adespota trag. frag.</hi> 108.</note> nor will the senses corrupted by the
alloy of the body exhibit to our minds empty and
vain phantoms. For we shall not employ the senses
at all to assist and minister to us, but our minds
will have escaped from them and so will be exercised
on the themes I have mentioned and aroused to
comprehend and associate with things incorporeal.
For by the mind we commune even with God, and
by its aid we are enabled to see and to grasp things
that escape the senses and are far apart in space,
or rather have no need of space: that is to say, all
of us who have lived so as to deserve such a vision,
conceiving it in the mind and laying hold thereof.</q>)
</p>

<p>
Ἀλλ᾽ ὁ μὲν Περικλῆς, ἅτε δὴ μεγαλόφρων
ἀνὴρ [C] καὶ τραφεὶς ἐλευθέρως ἐν ἐλευθέρᾳ τῇ πόλει,
ὑψηλοτέροις ἐψυχαγώγει λόγοις αὑτόν· ἐγὼ δὲ
γεγονὼς ἐκ τῶν οἷοι νῦν βροτοί εἰσιν ἀνθρωπικωτέροις
ἐμαυτὸν θέλγω καὶ παράγω λόγοις, καὶ τὸ
λίαν πικρὸν ἀφαιρῶ τῆς λύπης, πρὸς ἕκαστον τῶν
ἀεί μοι προσπιπτόντων ἀπὸ τοῦ πράγματος
δυσχερῶν τε [D] καὶ ἀτόπων φαντασμάτων ἐφαρμόζειν
τινὰ παραμυθίαν πειρώμενος, ὥσπερ ἐπῳδὴν
θηρίου δήγματι δάκνοντος αὐτὴν ἔσω τὴν
καρδίαν ἡμῶν καὶ τὰς φρένας. ἐκεῖνό τοι πρῶτόν
ἐστί μοι τῶν φαινομένων δυσχερῶν. νῦν ἐγὼ
μόνος ἀπολελείψομαι καθαρᾶς ἐνδεὴς ὁμιλίας καὶ
ἐλευθέρας ἐντεύξεως· οὐ γὰρ ἔστι μοι τέως ὅτῳ
διαλέξομαι θαρρῶν ὁμοίως. πότερον οὖν οὐδ᾽
ἐμαυτῷ διαλέγεσθαι ῥᾴδιόν ἐστί μοι; ἀλλ᾽ ἀφαιρήσεταί
μέ τις καὶ τὴν ἔννοιαν καὶ προσαναγκάσει
νοεῖν ἕτερα καὶ θαυμάζειν παρ᾽ ἃ βούλομαι; ἢ
τοῦτο μέν ἐστι τέρας ἤδη καὶ προσόμοιον τῷ
γράφειν ἐφ᾽ ὕδατος καὶ τῷ λίθον ἕψειν καὶ τῷ
ἱπταμένων ὀρνίθων ἐρευνᾶν ἴχνη τῆς πτήσεως;
οὐκοῦν ἐπειδὴ [249] τούτων ἡμᾶς οὐδεὶς ἀφαιρεῖται,
συνεσόμεθα δήπουθεν αὐτοί πως ἑαυτοῖς, ἴσως δὲ
καὶ ὁ δαίμων ὑποθήσεταί τι χρηστόν· οὐ γὰρ
εἰκὸς ἄνδρα ἑαυτὸν ἐπιτρέψαντα τῷ κρείττονι
<pb n='188'/><anchor id='Pg188'/><anchor id='Pg189'/>
παντάπασιν ἀμεληθῆναι καὶ καταλειφθῆναι παντελῶς
ἔρημον· ἀλλ᾽ αὐτοῦ καὶ ὁ θεὸς χεῖρα ἑὴν
ὑπερέσχε [B] καὶ θάρσος ἐνδίδωσ<note place='foot'>ἐνδίδωσι Hertlein suggests, δίδωσι MSS.</note> καὶ μένος ἐμπνεῖ
καὶ τὰ πρακτέα τίθησιν ἐπὶ νοῦν καὶ τῶν μὴ
πρακτέων ἀφίστησιν. εἵπετό τοι καὶ Σωκράτει
δαιμονία φωνὴ κωλύουσα πράττειν ὅσα μὴ χρεὼν
ἦν· φησὶ δὲ καὶ Ὅμηρος ὑπὲρ Ἀχιλλέως· τῷ γὰρ
ἐπὶ φρεσὶ θῆκεν, ὡς τοῦ θεοῦ καὶ τὰς ἐννοίας
ἡμῶν ἐγείροντος, ὅταν ἐπιστρέψας ὁ νοῦς εἰς
ἑαυτὸν αὑτῷ τε πρότερον ξυγγένηται καὶ τῷ θεῷ
δι ἑαυτοῦ μόνου, [C] κωλυδόομενος ὑπ᾽ οὐδενοός. οὐ γὰρ
ἀκοῆς ὁ νοῦς δεῖται πρὸς τὸ μαθεῖν οὐδὲ μὴν ὁ
θεὸς φωνῆς πρὸς τὸ διδάξαι τὰ δέοντα· ἀλλ᾽
αἰσθήσεως ἔξω πάσης ἀπὸ τοῦ κρείττονος ἡ
μετουσία γίνεται τῷ νῷ· τίνα μὲν τρόπον καὶ
ὅπως οὐ σχολὴ νῦν ἐπεξιέναι, τὸ δ᾽ ὅτι γίνεται
δῆλον<note place='foot'>δῆλον Cobet, δῆλοι Hertlein, MSS.</note> καὶ σαφεῖς οἱ μάρτυρες, οὐκ ἄδοξοί τινες
οὐδ᾽ ἐν τῇ Μεγαρέως [D] ἄξιοι τάττεσθαι μερίδι, ἀλλὰ
τῶν ἀπενεγκαμένων ἐπὶ σοφία τὰ πρωτεῖα.<note place='foot'>πρωτεῖα Cobet, πρῶτα Hertlein, MSS.</note>
</p>

<p>
(Ah, but Pericles, inasmuch as he was a man of
lofty soul and was bred as became a free man in
a free city, could solace himself with such sublime
arguments, whereas I, born of such men as now
are,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Iliad</hi> 5. 304.</note> must beguile and console myself with arguments
more human; and thus I assuage the excessive
bitterness of my sorrow, since I constantly endeavour
to devise some comfort for the anxious and uneasy
ideas which keep assailing me as they arise from
this event, like a charm against some wild beast
that is gnawing into my very vitals<note place='foot'>Cf. 243 <hi rend='smallcaps'>c</hi>.</note> and my soul.
And first and foremost of the hardships that I shall
have to face is this, that now I shall be bereft of our
guileless intercourse and unreserved conversation.
For I have no one now to whom I can talk with anything
like the same confidence. What, you say,
cannot I easily converse with myself? Nay, will not
some one rob me even of my thoughts, and besides
compel me to think differently, and to admire what
I prefer not to admire? Or does this robbery amount
to a prodigy unimaginable, like writing on water or
boiling a stone,<note place='foot'>Two familiar proverbs.</note> or tracing the track of the flight of
birds on the wing? Well then since no one can
deprive us of our thoughts, we shall surely commune
with ourselves in some fashion, and perhaps God
will suggest some alleviation. For it is not likely
that he who entrusts himself to God will be utterly
neglected and left wholly desolate. But over him
God stretches his hand,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Iliad</hi> 9. 420.</note> endues him with strength,
inspires him with courage, and puts into his mind
what he must do. We know too how a divine
voice accompanied Socrates and prevented him from
doing what he ought not. And Homer also says
of Achilles, <q>She put the thought in his mind,</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Iliad</hi> 1. 55.</note>
implying that it is God who suggests our thoughts
when the mind turns inwards and first communes
with itself, and then with God alone by itself,
hindered by nothing external. For the mind needs
no ears to learn with, still less does God need a
voice to teach us our duty: but apart from all sense-perception,
communion with God is vouchsafed to
the mind. How and in what manner I have not
now leisure to inquire, but that this does happen is
evident, and there are sure witnesses thereof&mdash;men
not obscure or only fit to be classed with the
Megarians,<note place='foot'>The Megarians on inquiring their rank among the Greeks
from the Delphic oracle were told that they were not in the
reckoning at all, ὑμεῖς δ᾽ οἱ Μεγαρεῖς οὐκ ἐν λόγῳ οὐδ᾽ ἐν
ἀριθμῷ; cf. Theocritus 14. 47.</note>&mdash;but such as have borne the palm for
wisdom.)
</p>

<p>
Οὐκοῦν ἐπειδὴ χρὴ προσδοκᾶν καὶ θεὸν ἡμῖν
παρέσεσθαι πάντως καὶ ἡμᾶς αὐτοὺς αὑτοῖς συνέσεσθαι,
τὸ λίαν δυσχερὲς ἀφαιρετέον ἐστι τῆς
λύπης. ἐπεὶ καὶ τὸν Ὀδυσσέα μόνον ἐν τῇ νήσῳ
καθειργμένον ἑπτὰ τοὺς πάντας ἐνιαυτούς, εἶτ᾽
ὀδυρόμενον, τῆς μὲν ἄλλης ἐπαινῶ καρτερίας, τῶν
θρήνων δὲ οὐκ ἄγαμαι. [250] τί γὰρ ὄφελος πόντον ἐπ᾽
ἰχθυόεντα δέρκεσθαι καὶ λείβειν δάκρυα; τὸ
<pb n='190'/><anchor id='Pg190'/><anchor id='Pg191'/>
δὲ μὴ προέσθαι μηδ᾽ ἀπαγορεῦσαι πρὸς τὴν τύχην,
ἀλλ᾽ ἄνδρα μέχρις ἐσχάτων γενέσθαι πόνων<note place='foot'>πόνων Hertlein suggests, φόβων MSS.</note> καὶ
κινδύνων, τοῦτο ἔμοιγε φαίνεται μεῖζον ἢ κατὰ
ἄνθρωπον. οὐ δὴ δίκαιον ἐπαινεῖν μὲν αὐτούς, μὴ
μιμεῖσθαι δέ, οὐδὲ νομίζειν, ὡς ἐκείνοις μὲν ὁ θεὸς
προθύμως συνελάμβανε, [B] τοὺς δὲ νῦν περιόψεται
τῆς ἀρετῆς ὁρῶν ἀντιποιουμένους, δι᾽ ἥνπερ ἄρα
κἀκείνοις ἔχαιρεν· οὐ γὰρ διὰ τὸ κάλλος τοῦ
σώματος, ἐπεί τοι τὸν Νιρέα μᾶλλον ἐχρῆν ἀγαπᾶσθαι,
οὐδὲ διὰ τὴν ἰσχύν, ἀπείρῳ γὰρ ὅσῳ
Λαιστρυγόνες καὶ Κύκλωπες ἦσαν αὐτοῦ κρείττους,
οὐδὲ διὰ τὸν πλοῦτον, οὕτω γὰρ ἂν ἔμεινεν
ἀπόρθητος Τροία. τί δὲ δεῖ πράγματα ἔχειν
αὐτὸν ἐπιζητοῦντα τὴν αἰτίαν, δι ἣν Ὀδυσσέα
φησὶν [C] ὁ ποιητὴς θεοφιλῆ, αὐτοῦ γε ἐξὸν ἀκούειν;
</p>

<p>
(It follows therefore that since we may expect that
God will be present with us in all our doings, and
that we shall again renew our intercourse, our grief
must lose its sharpest sting. For indeed in the case
of Odysseus<note place='foot'>Cf. Dio Chrysostom 13. 4, Arnim.</note> too, who was imprisoned on the island
for all those seven years and then bewailed his lot, I
applaud him for his fortitude on other occasions, but I
do not approve those lamentations. For of what avail
was it for him to gaze on the fishy sea and shed
tears?<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Odyssey</hi> 5. 84.</note> Never to abandon hope and despair of one's
fate, but to play the hero in the extremes of toil and
danger, does indeed seem to me more than can be
expected of any human being. But it is not right
to praise and not to imitate the Homeric heroes, or
to think that whereas God was ever ready to assist
them he will disregard the men of our day, if he
sees that they are striving to attain that very virtue
for which he favoured those others. For it was not
physical beauty that he favoured, since in that case
Nireus<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Iliad</hi> 2. 673.</note> would have been more approved; nor
strength, for the Laëstrygons<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Odyssey</hi> 10. 119 foll.</note> and the Cyclops were
infinitely stronger than Odysseus; nor riches, for
had that been so Troy would never have been
sacked. But why should I myself labour to discover
the reason why the poet says that Odysseus was
beloved by the gods, when we can hear it from
himself? It was)
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<lg>
<l>Οὕνεκ᾽ ἐπητής ἐσσι καὶ ἀγχίνοος καὶ ἐχέφρων.</l>
</lg>

<p>
(<q>Because thou art so wary, so
ready of wit, so prudent.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Odyssey</hi> 13. 332.</note>)
</p>

</quote>

<p>
δῆλον οὖν ὡς, εἴπερ ἡμῖν ταῦτα προσγένοιτο, τὸ
κρεῖττον οὐκ ἐλλείψει τὰ παρ᾽ ἑαυτοῦ, ἀλλὰ καὶ
κατὰ τὸν δοθέντα πάλαι ποτὲ Λακεδαιμονίοις
χρησμὸν καλούμενός τε καὶ ἄκλητος ὁ θεὸς
παρέσται.
</p>

<p>
(It is therefore evident
that if we have these qualities in addition, God
on His side will not fail us, but in the words of
the oracle once given of old to the Lacedaemonians,
<q>Invoked or not invoked, God will be present
with us.</q><note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Oration</hi> 6. 201 <hi rend='smallcaps'>c</hi>; Thucydides 1. 118.</note>)
</p>

<p>
[D] Τούτοις ἐμαυτὸν ψυχαγωγήσας ἐπ᾽ ἐκεῖνο τὸ
μέρος ἄπειμι πάλιν, ὃ δοκεῖ τῇ μὲν ἀληθείᾳ
μικρὸν εἶναι, πρὸς δόξαν δὲ ὅμως οὐκ ἀγεννές.
Ὁμήρου τοί φασι δεῖσθαι καὶ τὸν Ἀλέξανδρον, οὐ
δήπου συνόντος, ἀλλὰ κηρύττοντος ὥσπερ Ἀχιλλέα
καὶ Πάτροκλον καὶ Αἴαντας ἄμφω καὶ τὸν
<pb n='192'/><anchor id='Pg192'/><anchor id='Pg193'/>
Ἀντίλοχον. ἀλλ᾽ ὁ μὲν ὑπερορῶν ἀεὶ τῶν παρόντων,
ἐφιέμενος δὲ τῶν ἀπόντων οὐκ ἠγάπα
τοῖς καθ᾽ ἑαυτὸν οὐδὲ ἠρκεῖτο τοῖς δοθεῖσι· καὶ
εἴπερ ἔτυχεν Ὁμήρου, [251] τὴν Ἀπόλλωνος ἴσως ἂν
ἐπόθησε λύραν, ᾗ τοῖς Πηλέως ἐκεῖνος ἐφύμνησε
γάμοις, οὐ τῆς Ὁμήρου συνέσεως τοῦτο πλάσμα
νομίσας, ἀλλ᾽ ἀληθὲς ἔργον ἐνυφανθὲν τοῖς ἔπεσιν,
ὥσπερ οἶμαι τὸ
</p>

<p>
(Now that I have consoled myself with these
arguments I will go back to that other consideration
which, though it seems trivial, nevertheless is generally
esteemed to be not ignoble. Even Alexander,
we are told, felt a need for Homer, not, of course, to
be his companion, but to be his herald, as he was for
Achilles and Patroclus and the two Ajaxes and
Antilochus. But Alexander, ever despising what he
had and longing for what he had not, could never be
content with his contemporaries or be satisfied with
the gifts that had been granted to him. And even if
Homer had fallen to his lot he would probably have
coveted the lyre of Apollo on which the god played
at the nuptials of Peleus;<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Iliad</hi> 24. 63.</note> and he would not have
regarded it as an invention of Homer's genius but
an actual fact that had been woven into the epic,
as when for instance Homer says,)
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<lg>
<l>Ἠὼς μὲν κροκόπεπλος ἐκίδνατο πᾶσαν ἐπ᾽ αἶαν</l>
</lg>

<p>
(<q>Now Dawn
with her saffron robe was spread over the whole
earth</q>;<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Iliad</hi> 8. 1.</note>)
</p>

</quote>

<p>
καὶ
</p>

<p>
(and)
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<lg>
<l>Ἡέλιος δ᾽ ἀνόρουσε</l>
</lg>

<p>
(<q>Then uprose the Sun</q>;<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Odyssey</hi> 3. 1.</note>)
</p>

</quote>

<p>
καὶ
</p>

<p>
(and)
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<lg>
<l>Κρήτη τις γαῖ᾽ ἐστί,</l>
</lg>

<p>
(<q>There
is a land called Crete</q>;<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Odyssey</hi> 19. 172.</note>)
</p>

</quote>

<p>
καὶ ὅσα τοιαῦτά φασιν οἱ ποιηταί, δῆλα καὶ
ἐναργῆ τὰ μὲν ὄντα καὶ εἰς ἡμᾶς ἕτι, τὰ δὲ γιγνόμενα.
</p>

<p>
(or other similar statements
of poets about plain and palpable things partly
existing to this very day, partly still happening.)
</p>

<p>
[B] Ἀλλὰ τῷ μὲν εἴτε μέγεθος ἀρετῆς ὑπερέχον<note place='foot'>ὑπερέχον Naber, ὑπάρχον Hertlein, MSS.</note>
καὶ τῶν προσόντων ἀγαθῶν οὐδαμῶς ἐλάττων
σύνεσις εἰς τοσαύτην ἐπιθυμίαν τὴν ψυχὴν ἐξῆγεν,
ὥστε μειζόνων ἢ κατὰ τοὺς ἄλλους ὀρέγεσθαι,<note place='foot'>ὀρέγεσθαι Petavius, lacuna Hertlein, MSS.</note>
εἴθ᾽ ὑπερβολή τις ἀνδρείας καὶ θάρσους εἰς ἀλαζονείαν
ἄγουσα<note place='foot'>ἄγουσα Cobet, ῥέπουσα Hertlein, ... οὐσα V.</note> καὶ πρὸς αὐθάδειαν βλέπουσα,
ἀφείσθω σκοπεῖν ἐν κοινῷ τοῖς βουλομένοις ἐπαινεῖν
ἢ ψέγειν αὐτόν, [C] εἴ τις ἄρα καὶ ταύτης ὑπολαμβάνει
τῆς μερίδος προσήκειν ἐκείνῳ. ἡμεῖς δὲ τοῖς
παροῦσιν ἀγαπῶντες ἀεὶ καὶ τῶν ἀπόντων ἥκιστα
μεταποιούμενοι στέργομεν μέν, ὁπόταν ὁ κήρυξ
<pb n='194'/><anchor id='Pg194'/><anchor id='Pg195'/>
ἐπαινῇ, θεατής τε καὶ συναγωνιστὴς πάντων ἡμῖν
γεγονώς, μὴ τοὺς λόγους παραδεξάμενος εἰς χάριν
καὶ ἀπέχθειαν εἰκῇ πεπλασμένους· ἀρκεῖ δὲ ἡμῖν
καὶ φιλεῖν ὁμολογῶν μόνον, ἐς δὲ τὰ ἄλλα σιωπηλότερος
ὢν καὶ τῶν Πυθαγόρᾳ τελεσθέντων.
</p>

<p>
(But in Alexander's case, whether a superabundance
of virtue and an intelligence that matched the
advantages with which he was endowed exalted his
soul to such heights of ambition that he aimed
at greater achievements than are within the scope of
other men; or whether the cause was an excess
of courage and valour that led him into ostentation
and bordered on sinful pride, must be left as a
general topic for consideration by those who desire
to write either a panegyric of him or a criticism;
if indeed anyone thinks that criticism also can
properly be applied to him. I on the contrary can
always be content with what I have and am the
last to covet what I have not, and so am well content
when my praises are uttered by a herald who
has been an eyewitness and comrade-in-arms in all
that I have done; and who has never admitted any
statements invented at random out of partiality or
prejudice. And it is enough for me if he only admit
his love for me, though on all else he were more
silent than those initiated by Pythagoras.)
</p>

<p>
[D] Ἐνταῦθα ὑπέρχεταί μοι καὶ τὸ θρυλούμενον,
ὡς οὐκ εἰς Ἰλλυριοὺς μόνον, ἀλλὰ καὶ εἰς Θρᾷκας
ἀφίξῃ καὶ τοὺς περὶ τὴν θάλατταν ἐκείνην οἰκοῦντας
Ἕλληνας, ἐν οἷς γενομένῳ μοι καὶ τραφέντι
πολὺς ἐντέτηκεν ἔρως ἀνδρῶν τε καὶ χωρίων καὶ
πόλεων. ἴσως δὲ οὐ φαῦλος οὐδὲ ἐκείνων ἐναπολέλειπται
ταῖς ψυχαῖς ἔρως ἡμῶν, οἷς εὖ οἶδ᾽ ὅτι
τὸ λεγόμενον ἀσπάσιος [252] ἐλθὼν ἂν γένοιο, δικαίαν
ἀμοιβὴν ἀντιδιδοὺς αὐτοῖς ὑπὲρ ὧν ἡμᾶς ἀπολέλοιπας
ἐνθάδε. καὶ τοῦτο μὲν οὐχ ὡς εὐχόμενος·
ἐπεὶ τό γε ἰέναι πρὸς ἡμᾶς τὴν αὐτὴν ταχέως
ἄμεινον· ἀλλ᾽ ὡς, εἰ γένοιτο, καὶ πρὸς τοῦθ᾽ ἕξων
οὐκ ἀπαραμυθήτως οὐδὲ ἀψυχαγωγήτως ἐννοῶ,
συγχαίρων ἐκείνοις, ὅτι σε παρ᾽ ἡμῶν ὄψονται.
Κελτοῖς γὰρ ἐμαυτὸν ἤδη διὰ σὲ συντάττω, ἄνδρα
εἰς τοὺς πρώτους τῶν Ἑλλήνων τελοῦντα καὶ κατ᾽
εὐνομίαν καὶ κατὰ [B] ἀρετὴν τὴν ἄλλην, καὶ ῥητορείαν
ἄκρον καὶ φιλοσοφίας οὐκ ἄπειρον, ἧς Ἕλληνες
μόνοι τὰ κράτιστα μετεληλύθασι, λόγῳ τἀληθές,
ὥσπερ οὖν πέφυκε, θηρεύσαντες, οὐκ ἀπίστοις
μύθοις οὐδὲ παραδόξῳ τερατείᾳ προσέχειν ἡμᾶς,
ὥσπερ οἱ πολλοὶ τῶν βαρβάρων, ἐάσαντες.
</p>

<p>
(Here however I am reminded of the report current
that you are going not only to Illyria but to Thrace
also, and among the Greeks who dwell on the shores
of that sea.<note place='foot'>The Propontis.</note> Among them I was born and brought
up, and hence I have a deeply rooted affection for
them and for those parts and the cities there. And
it may be that in their hearts also there still remains
no slight affection for me: I am therefore well
assured that you will, as the saying is, gladden their
hearts by your coming, and there will be a fair
exchange, since they will gain in proportion as I
lose by your leaving me here. And I say this not
because I wish you to go&mdash;for it were far better if
you should return to me by the same road without
delay&mdash;but the thought in my mind is that even for
this loss I shall not be without comfort or consolation,
since I can rejoice with them on seeing you just
come from us. I say <q>us,</q> since on your account I
now rank myself among the Celts,<note place='foot'>Sallust was a native of Gaul.</note> seeing that you are
worthy to be counted among the most distinguished
Greeks for your upright administration and your
other virtues; and also for your consummate skill in
oratory; in philosophy too you are thoroughly
versed, a field wherein the Greeks alone have
attained the highest rank; for they sought after
truth, as its nature requires, by the aid of reason
and did not suffer us to pay heed to incredible fables
or impossible miracles like most of the barbarians.)
</p>

<pb n='196'/><anchor id='Pg196'/><anchor id='Pg197'/>

<p>
Ἀλλὰ καὶ τοῦτο μὲν ὅπως ποτὲ ἔχει, τανῦν
ἀφείσθω. σὲ δέ· προπέμπειν ἤδη γὰρ ἄξιον μετ᾽
εὐφημίας· ἄγοι μὲν θεὸς εὐμενής, ὅποι ποτ᾽ ἂν
δέῃ πορεύεσθαι, [C] Ξένιος δὲ ὑποδέχοιτο καὶ Φίλιος
εὔνους, ἄγοι τε διὰ γῆς ἀσφαλῶς· κἂν πλεῖν δέῃ,
στορεννύσθω τὰ κύματα· πᾶσι δὲ φανείης φίλος
καὶ τίμιος, ἡδὺς μὲν προσιών, ἀλγεινὸς δὲ ἀπολείπων
αὐτούς· στέργων δὲ ἡμᾶς ἥκιστα ποθήσειας
ἀνδρὸς ἑταίρου καὶ φίλου πιστοῦ κοινωνίαν.
εὐμενῆ δὲ καὶ τὸν αὐτοκράτορά σοι θεὸς ἀποφήνειε
καὶ τὰ ἄλλα πάντα κατὰ νοῦν διδοίη, [D] καὶ τὴν
οἴκαδε παρ᾽ ἡμᾶς πορείαν ἀσφαλῆ παρασκευάζοι
καὶ ταχεῖαν.
</p>

<p>
(However, this subject also, whatever the truth
about it may be, I must lay aside for the present.
But as for you&mdash;for I must needs dismiss you with
auspicious words&mdash;may God in His goodness be your
guide wherever you may have to journey, and as the
God of Strangers and the Friendly One<note place='foot'>These are regular epithets of Zeus.</note> may He
receive you graciously and lead you safely by land;
and if you must go by sea, may He smooth the
waves!<note place='foot'>Theocritus 7. 57.</note> And may you be loved and honoured
by all you meet, welcome when you arrive, regretted
when you leave them! Though you retain your
affection for me, may you never lack the society of a
good comrade and faithful friend! And may God
make the Emperor gracious to you, and grant you all
else according to your desire, and make ready for
you a safe and speedy journey home to us!)
</p>

<p>
Ταῦτά σοι μετὰ τῶν καλῶν κἈγαθῶν ἀνδρῶν
συνεύχομαι, καὶ ἔτι πρὸς τοίτοις
</p>

<p>
(In these prayers for you I am echoed by all good
and honourable men; and let me add one prayer
more:)
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<lg>
<l>Οὖλέ τε καὶ μέγα χαῖρε, θεοὶ δὲ τοι ὄλβια δοῖεν,</l>
<l>Νοστῆσαι οἶκόνδε φίλην ἐς πατρίδα γαῖαν.</l>
</lg>

<p>
(<q>Health and great joy be with thee, and may
the gods give thee all things good, even to come
home again to thy dear fatherland!</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Odyssey</hi> 24. 402; and 10. 562.</note>)
</p>

</quote>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='200'/><anchor id='Pg200'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Letter to Themistius the
Philosopher</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Introduction</head>

<p>
On the strength of his Aristotelian <q>Paraphrases</q>
Themistius may be called a scholar, though hardly
a philosopher as he himself claimed. Technically he
was a Sophist: that is to say he gave public lectures
(ἐπιδείξεις), wrote exercises after the Sophistic
pattern and went on embassies, which were entrusted
to him solely on account of his persuasive charm.
But he insisted that he was no Sophist, because he
took no fees<note place='foot'>Themistius 260 <hi rend='smallcaps'>c</hi>, 345 <hi rend='smallcaps'>c</hi>.</note> and styled himself a practical philosopher.<note place='foot'>245 <hi rend='smallcaps'>d</hi>.</note>
He was indifferent to the Neo-Platonic
philosophy,<note place='foot'>33, 295 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b</hi>.</note> and, since Constantius made him a
Senator, he cannot have betrayed any zeal for the
Pagan religion. From Julian's Pagan restoration he
seems to have held aloof, and, though Julian had
been his pupil, probably at Nicomedia, he did not
appoint him to any office. Under the Christian
Emperor Theodosius he held a prefecture. There is
no evidence for a positive coolness, such as Zeller<note place='foot'>Vol. 5, p. 742.</note>
assumes, between Themistius and Julian, and we
know too little of their relations to assert with some
critics that the respectful tone of this letter is
ironical.<note place='foot'>Libanius <hi rend='italic'>Epistle</hi> 1061 mentions an Oration by Themistius
in praise of Julian, but this is not extant.</note> It was probably written after Julian had
<pb n='201'/><anchor id='Pg201'/>
become Emperor, though there is nothing in it that
would not suit an earlier date; it is sometimes
assigned to 355 when Julian was still Caesar. The
quotations from Aristotle are appropriately addressed
to Themistius as an Aristotelian commentator.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='202'/><anchor id='Pg202'/><anchor id='Pg203'/>

<div>

<p>
[253] ΙΟΥΛΙΑΝΟΥ ΑΥΤΟΚΡΑΤΟΡΟΣ
</p>

<p>
(Julian, Emperor)
</p>

<p>
ΘΕΜΙΣΤΙΩΙ ΦΙΛΟΣΟΦΩΙ
</p>

<p>
(To Themistius the
Philosopher)
</p>

<p>
Ἐγώ σοι βεβαιῶσαι μέν, ὥσπερ οὖν γράφεις,
τὰς ἐλπίδας καὶ σφόδρα εὔχομαι, δέδοικα δὲ μὴ
διαμάρτω, μείζονος οὔσης τῆς ὑποσχέσεως, ἣν
ὑπὲρ ἐμοῦ πρός τε τοὺς ἄλλους ἅπαντας καὶ ἔτι
μᾶλλον πρὸς σεαυτὸν ποιῇ· καί μοι πάλαι μὲν
οἰομένῳ πρός τε τὸν Ἀλέξανδρον καὶ τὸν Μάρκον,
καὶ εἴ τις ἄλλος γέγονεν ἀρετῇ διαφέρων, [B] εἶναι
τὴν ἅμιλλαν φρίκη τις προσῄει καὶ δέος θαυμαστόν,
μὴ τοῦ μὲν ἀπολείπεσθαι παντελῶς τῆς
ἀνδρείας δόξω, τοῦ δὲ τῆς τελείας ἀρετῆς οὐδὲ ἐπ᾽
ὀλίγον ἐφίκωμαι. εἰς ταῦτα ἀφορῶν ἀνεπειθόμην
τὴν σχολὴν ἐπαινεῖν, καὶ τῶν Ἀττικῶν διαιτημάτων<note place='foot'>διαιτημάτων Naber, διηγημάτων Hertlein, MSS.</note>
αὐτός τε ἡδέως ἐμεμνήμην καὶ τοῖς φίλοις
ὑμῖν προσᾴδειν ἠξίουν, ὥσπερ οἱ τὰ βαρέα φορτία
φέροντες ἐν ταῖς ᾠδαῖς ἐπικουφίζουσιν αὑτοῖς
τὴν ταλαιπωρίαν. [C] σὺ δέ μοι νῦν μεῖζον ἐποίησας
διὰ τῆς ἔναγχος ἐπιστολῆς τὸ δέος καὶ
τὸν ἀγῶνα τῷ παντὶ χαλεπώτερον ἔδειξας, ἐν
ταύτῃ παρὰ τοῦ θεοῦ τετάχθαι με τῇ μερίδι λέγων,
ἐν ᾗ πρότερον Ἡρακλῆς καὶ Διόνυσος ἐγενέσθην
φιλοσοφοῦντες ὁμοῦ καὶ βασιλεύοντες καὶ πᾶσαν
<pb n='204'/><anchor id='Pg204'/><anchor id='Pg205'/>
σχεδὸν [254] τῆς ἐπιπολαζούσης κακίας ἀνακαθαιρόμενοι
γῆν τε καὶ θάλατταν. κελεύεις δὲ πᾶσαν
ἀποσεισάμενον σχολῆς ἔννοιαν καὶ ῥᾳστώνης
σκοπεῖν, ὅπως τῆς ὑποθέσεως ἀξίως ἀγωνιούμεθα·
εἶτα ἐπ᾽ αὐτοῖς τῶν νομοθετῶν μέμνησαι, Σόλωνος,
Πιττακοῦ, Λυκούργου, καὶ τούτων ἁπάντων μείζονα
χρῆναι παρ᾽ ἡμῶν λέγεις τοὺς ἀνθρώπους ἐν
δίκῃ νῦν περιμένειν. τούτοις ἐγὼ τοῖς λόγοις
ἐντυχὼν ἐξεπλάγην μικροῦ· [B] σοὶ μὲν γὰρ ὑπελάμβανον
οὐδαμῶς θεμιτὸν κολακεύειν ἢ ψεύδεσθαι,
ἐμαυτῷ δὲ συνειδὼς φύσεως μὲν ἕνεκα διαφέρον
οὐδὲν οὔτε ἐξ ἀρχῆς οὔτε νῦν ὑπάρξαν, φιλοσοφίας
δὲ ἐρασθέντι μόνον· τὰς γὰρ ἐν μέσῳ σιγῶ
τύχας, αἵ μοι τὸν ἔρωτα τοῦτον ἀτελῆ τέως
ἐφύλαξαν· οὐκ εἴχον οὖν ὅ, τι χρὴ περὶ τῶν
τοιούτων λόγων συμβαλεῖν, ἕως ἐπὶ νοῦν ἤγαγεν
ὁ θεός, [C] μή ποτε ἄρα προτρέπειν ἐθέλεις διὰ τῶν
ἐπαίνων καὶ τῶν ἀγώνων δεῖξαι τὸ μέγεθος, οἷς
ἀνάγκη πᾶσα τὸν ἐν πολιτείᾳ ζῶντα παραβεβλῆσθαι
τὸν ἅπαντα χρόνον.
</p>

<p>
(I earnestly desire to fulfil your hopes of me even
as you express them in your letter, but I am afraid I
shall fall short of them, since the expectations you
have raised both in the minds of others, and still
more in your own, are beyond my powers. There
was a time when I believed that I ought to try
to rival men who have been most distinguished for
excellence, Alexander, for instance, or Marcus;<note place='foot'>The Emperor Marcus Aurelius.</note> but
I shivered at the thought and was seized with terror
lest I should fail entirely to come up to the courage
of the former, and should not make even the least
approach to the latter's perfect virtue. With this in
mind I convinced myself that I preferred a life of
leisure, and I both gladly recalled the Attic manner
of living, and thought myself to be in sweet
accord with you who are my friends, just as those
who carry heavy burdens lighten their labour by
singing.<note place='foot'>Apparently an echo of Dio Chrysostom, <hi rend='italic'>Oration</hi> 1. 9,
Arnim.</note> But by your recent letter you have increased
my fears, and you point to an enterprise in
every way more difficult. You say that God has
placed me in the same position as Heracles and
Dionysus of old who, being at once philosophers and
kings, purged almost the whole earth and sea of the
evils that infested them. You bid me shake off all
thought of leisure and inactivity that I may prove
to be a good soldier worthy of so high a destiny.
And besides those examples you go on to remind me
of law-givers such as Solon, Pittacus, and Lycurgus,
and you say that men have the right to expect from
me now greater things than from any of these.
When I read these words I was almost dumbfounded;
for on the one hand I was sure that it was
unlawful for you as a philosopher to flatter or deceive;
on the other hand I am fully conscious that by nature
there is nothing remarkable about me&mdash;there never
was from the first nor has there come to be now,&mdash;but
as regards philosophy I have only fallen in love
with it (I say nothing of the fates that have intervened<note place='foot'>Euripides, <hi rend='italic'>Orestes</hi> 16.</note>
to make that love so far ineffectual). I could
not tell therefore how I ought to interpret such expressions,
until God brought it into my mind that
perhaps by your very praises you wished to exhort
me, and to point out how great are those trials to
which a statesman must inevitably be exposed every
day of his life.)
</p>

<p>
Τοῦτο δὲ ἀποτρέποντός ἐστι πλέον ἢ πρὸς τὸν
βίον παρορμῶντος. ὥσπερ γὰρ εἴ τις τὸν πορθμὸν
τὸν παρ᾽ ὑμῖν πλέων καὶ οὐδὲ τοῦτον ῥᾳδίως οὐδὲ
εὐκόλως ὑφιστάμενος ἀκούοι παρά του μαντικὴν
ἐπαγγελλομένου τέχνην, [D] ὡς χρεὼν αὐτὸν τὸν
Αἰγαῖον ἀναμετρῆσαι καὶ τὸν Ἰόνιον καὶ τῆς ἔξω
θαλάσσης ἅψασθαι, καὶ <q>Νῦν μὲν</q> ὁρᾷς ὁ προφήτης
λέγοι <q>τείχη καὶ λιμένας, ἐκεῖ δὲ γενόμενος
<pb n='206'/><anchor id='Pg206'/><anchor id='Pg207'/>
οὐδὲ σκοπιὰν οὐδὲ πέτραν ὄψει, ἀλλ᾽ ἀγαπήσεις
καὶ ναῦν πόρρωθεν κατιδὼν προσειπεῖν τοὺς ἐμπλέοντας,
καὶ τῆς γῆς ὀψέ ποτε ἁψάμενος, τῷ
θεῷ πολλάκις προσεύξῃ, πρὸς αὐτῷ γοῦν τῷ τέλει
τοῦ βίου τυχεῖν [255] ὅρμου καὶ τήν τε ναῦν σώαν
παραδοῦναι καὶ τοὺς ἐμπλέοντας ἀπαθεῖς τοῖς
οἰκείοις κακῶν παραστῆσαι καὶ τὸ σῶμα τῇ
μητρὶ γῇ δοῦναι, τοῦτο δὲ ἐσόμενον ἴσως ἄδηλον
ἔσται σοι μέχρι τῆς τελευταίας ἐκείνης ἡμέρας·</q>
ἆρ᾽ οἴει τούτων ἀκούσαντα τῶν λόγων ἐκεῖνον
πόλιν γ᾽ ἂν<note place='foot'>γ᾽ ἂν Hertlein suggests, γοῦν MSS.</note> οἰκεῖν ἑλέσθαι πλησίον θαλάσσης,
οὐχὶ δὲ χαίρειν εἰπόντα πλούτῳ καὶ τοῖς ἐξ
ἐμπορίας ἀγαθοῖς περιγιγνομένοις, γνωρέμων πολλῶν,
ξενικῆς φιλίας, [B] ἱστορίας ἐθνῶν καὶ πόλεων
ὑπεριδόντα σοφὸν ἀποφαίνειν τὸν τοῦ Νεοκλέους,
ὃς κελεύει λαθεῖν βιώσαντα; καὶ σὺ δὲ ἕοικας
τοῦτο καταμαθὼν προκαταλαμβάνειν ἡμᾶς ταῖς
εἰς τὸν Ἐπίκουρον λοιδορίαις καὶ προεξαιρεῖν τὴν
τοιαύτην γνώμην. φὴς γάρ που σχολὴν ἐπαινεῖν
ἀπράγμονα καὶ διαλέξεις ἐν περιπάτοις προσήκειν
ἐκείνῳ· [C] ἐγὲ δὲ ὅτι μὲν οὐ καλῶς Ἐπικούρῳ
ταῦτα ἐδόκει, πάλαι καὶ σφόδρα πείθομαι· εἰ δὲ
πάνθ᾽ ὁντινοῦν ἐπὶ πολιτείαν προτρέπειν ἄξιον,
καὶ τὸν ἧττον πεφυκότα καὶ τὸν οὔπω τελέως
δυνάμενον, ἐπὶ πλεῖστον ἴσως διαπορῆσαι χρή.
λέγουσι γάρ τοι καὶ τὸν Σωκράτη πολλοὺς μὲν οὐ
σφόδρα εὐφυῶς<note place='foot'>εὐφυῶς Reiske adds.</note> ἔχοντας ἀπαγαγεῖν τοῦ βήματος,
<pb n='208'/><anchor id='Pg208'/><anchor id='Pg209'/>
καὶ Γλαύκωνα ἐκεῖνον, Ξενοφῶν λέγει· τὸν δὲ<note place='foot'>καὶ Γλαύκωνα ... λέγει· τὸν δὲ Wyttenbach, Γλαύκωνα δὲ
ἐκεῖνον ὡς Ξενοφῶν λέγει, καὶ τὸν Hertlein, MSS.</note>
τοῦ Κλεινίου παῖδα πειραθῆναι μὲν ἐπισχεῖν, [D] οὐ
δυνηθῆναι δὲ περιγενέσθαι τοῦ νεανίσκου τῆς
ὁρμῆς. ἡμεῖς δὲ καὶ ἄκοντας καὶ ξυνιέντας αὑτῶν
προσαναγκάσομεν, θαρρεῖν ὑπὲρ τηλικούτων ἔργων
κελεύοντες, ὧν οὐκ ἀρετὴ μόνον ἐστὶν οὐδὲ
προαίρεσις ὀρθὴ κυρία, πολὺ δὲ πλέον ἡ τύχη
κρατοῦσα πανταχοῦ καὶ βιαζομένη ῥέπειν ᾗπερ
ἂν ἐθέλῃ τὰ πράγματα; Χρύσιππος δὲ δοκεῦ τὰ
μὲν ἄλλα σοφὸς εἶναι καὶ νομισθῆναι δικαίως,
ἀγνοήσας δὲ τὴν τύχην καὶ τὸ αὐτόματον καί
τινας ἄλλας αἰτίας [256] τοιαύτας ἔξωθεν τοῖς πρακτικοῖς
παρεμπιπτούσας οὐ σφόδρα ὁμολογούμενα
λέγειν οἷς ὁ χρόνος ἡμᾶς διὰ μυρίων ἐναργῶς
διδάσκει παραδειγμάτων. ποῦ γὰρ εὐτυχῆ καὶ
μακάριον Κάτωνα φήσομεν; ποῦ δὲ Δίωνα τὸν
Σικελιώτην εὐδαίμονα; οἷς τοῦ μὲν ἀποθανεῖν
ἔμελεν ἴσως οὐδέν, τοῦ δὲ μὴ λείπειν ἀτελεῖς τὰς
πράξεις, ἐφ᾽ ἃς ἐξ ἀρχῆς ὥρμησαν, [B] καὶ σφόδρα
ἔμελε, καὶ πάντα ἂν εἵλοντο παθεῖν ὑπὲρ τούτου.
σφαλέντες δὲ ἐν ἐκείνοις εἰ μὲν εὐσχημόνως
ἔφερον, ὥσπερ οὖν λέγεται, τὴν τύχην παραμυθίαν
ἔσχον ἐκ τῆς ἀρετῆς οὐ μικράν, εὐδαίμονες
δὲ οὐκ ἂν λέγοιντο τῶν καλλίστων πράξεων
διημαρτηκότες, πλὴν ἴσως διὰ τὴν Στωικὴν
ἔνστασιν· πρὸς ἣν ῥητέον, ὡς οὐ ταὐτόν ἐστιν
ἐπαινεῖσθα καὶ μακαρίζεσθαι, καὶ εἰ φύσει τὸ
ζῷον εὐδαιμονίας ὀρέγεται, [C] κρεῖττον εἶναι τὸ κατ᾽
<pb n='210'/><anchor id='Pg210'/><anchor id='Pg211'/>
ἐκείνην μακαριστὸν τέλος τοῦ κατ᾽ ἀρετὴν ἐπαινετοῦ.
ἥκιστα δὲ φιλεῖ τῆς εὐδαιμονίας ἡ βεβαιότης
τῇ τύχῃ πιστεύειν. καὶ τοὺς ἐν πολιτείᾳ
ζῶντας οὐκ ἔνεστιν ἔνευ ταύτης ἀναπνεῖν τὸ
δὴ λεγόμενον ...<note place='foot'>After λεγόμενον several words are lost.</note> ἀληθῶς θεωροῦντες εἴτε καὶ
πεποιήκασι καὶ στρατηγὸν λόγῳ<note place='foot'>λόγῳ Reiske, λόγοι Hertlein, MSS.</note>, καθάπερ οἱ
τὰς ἰδέας εἴτε καὶ ψευδῶς ξυντιθέντες, ἐν τοῖς
ἀσωμάτοις καὶ νοητοῖς ἱδρῦσθαί που τῶν τυχαίων
ὑπεράνω πάντων, ἢ τὸν Διογένους ἐκεῖνον
</p>

<p>
(But your method is more likely to discourage than
to make one eager for such an existence. Suppose that
a man were navigating your strait,<note place='foot'>The Bosporus; Themistius was probably at Constantinople.</note> and were finding
even that none too easy or safe, and then suppose some
professional soothsayer should tell him that he would
have to traverse the Aegaean and then the Ionian
Sea, and finally embark on the outer sea. <q>Here,</q>
that prophet would say, <q>you see towns and harbours,
but when you arrive there you will see not so much
as a watch-tower or a rock, but you will be thankful
to descry even a ship in the distance and to hail her
crew. You will often pray to God that you may, however
late, touch land and reach a harbour, though that
were to be the last day of your life. You will pray
to be allowed to bring home your ship safe and
sound and restore your crew unscathed to their
friends, and then to commit your body to mother
earth. And this indeed may happen, but you will
not be sure of it until that final day.</q> Do you
think that such a man after being told all this would
choose even to live in a sea-port town? Would he
not bid adieu to money-making and all the advantages
of commerce, and caring little for troops of friends
and acquaintances abroad, and all that he might
learn about nations and cities, would he not approve
the wisdom of the son of Neocles<note place='foot'>Epicurus; his advice was λαθὲ βιώσας.</note> who bids
us <q>Live in obscurity</q>? Indeed, you apparently
perceived this, and by your abuse of Epicurus you
tried to forestall me and to eradicate beforehand
any such purpose. For you go on to say that it was
to be expected that so idle a man as he should commend
leisure and conversations during walks. Now
for my part I have long been firmly convinced that
Epicurus was mistaken in that view of his, but
whether it be proper to urge into public life any and
every man, both him who lacks natural abilities and
him who is not yet completely equipped, is a point
that deserves the most careful consideration. We
are told that Socrates dissuaded from the statesman's
profession<note place='foot'>Literally <q>from the βῆμα,</q> <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> the stone on the Pnyx
from which the Athenian orator addressed the people.</note> many who had no great natural talent, and
Glaucon too, Xenophon<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Memorabilia</hi> 3. 6. 1.</note> tells us; and that he tried
to restrain the son of Cleinias<note place='foot'>Alcibiades.</note> also, but could not
curb the youth's impetuous ambition. Then shall
we try to force into that career men who are
reluctant and conscious of their deficiencies, and
urge them to be self-confident about such great
tasks? For in such matters not virtue alone or
a wise policy is paramount, but to a far greater
degree Fortune holds sway throughout and compels
events to incline as she wills. Chrysippus<note place='foot'>The Stoic philosopher.</note> indeed,
though in other respects he seems a wise man and
to have been rightly so esteemed, yet in ignoring
fortune and chance and all other such external
causes that fall in to block the path of men of affairs,
he uttered paradoxes wholly at variance with facts
about which the past teaches us clearly by countless
examples. For instance, shall we call Cato a fortunate
and happy man? Or shall we say that Dio of Sicily
had a happy lot? It is true that for death they
probably cared nothing, but they did care greatly
about not leaving unfinished the undertakings which
they had originally set on foot, and to secure that
end there is nothing that they would not have
endured. In that they were disappointed, and I
admit that they bore their lot with great dignity, as
we learn, and derived no small consolation from
their virtue; but happy one could not call them,
seeing that they had failed in all those noble enterprises,
unless perhaps according to the Stoic conception
of happiness. And with regard to that same
Stoic conception we must admit that to be applauded
and to be counted happy are two very different
things, and that if every living thing naturally desires
happiness,<note place='foot'>Cf. Aristotle, <hi rend='italic'>Nicomachean Ethics</hi> 1. 10. 6.</note> it is better to make it our aim to be
congratulated on the score of happiness rather than
to be applauded on the score of virtue. But happiness
that depends on the chances of Fortune is very
rarely secure. And yet men who are engaged in
public life cannot, as the saying is, so much as
breathe unless she is on their side ... and they
have created a merely verbal idea of a leader who
is established somewhere above all the chances of
Fortune in the sphere of things incorporeal and
intelligible, just as men define the ideas, whether
envisaging them truly or falsely imagining them.
Or again they give us the ideal man, according to
Diogenes)
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<lg>
<l>Ἄπολιν, [D] ἄοικον, πατρίδος ἐστερημένον,</l>
</lg>

<p>
(<q>The man without a city, without a home,
bereft of a fatherland,</q><note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Oration</hi> 6. 195<hi rend='smallcaps'>b</hi>, note.</note>)
</p>

</quote>

<p>
οὐκ ἔχοντα μὲν εἰς ὅ,τι παρ᾽ αὐτῆς εὖ πάθῃ καὶ
τοὐναντίον ἐν τίνι σφαλῇ· τοῦτον δὲ ὃν ἡ συνήθεια
καλεῖν εἴωθε καὶ Ὅμηρος πρῶτος,
</p>

<p>
(that is to say, a man who
can gain nothing from Fortune, and on the other
hand has nothing to lose. But one whom we are
in the habit of calling, as Homer did first,)
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<lg>
<l>Ὧι λαοί τ᾽ ἐπιτετράφαται καὶ τόσσα μέμηλεν,</l>
</lg>

<p>
(<q>The
man to whom the people have been entrusted and
so many cares belong,</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Iliad</hi> 2. 25.</note>)
</p>

</quote>

<p>
πῶς ἄν τις ἔξω τύχης ἀπαγαγὼν τὴν θέσιν φύλάσσοι;
πάλιν [257] δ᾽ ὁ αὑτὸν ὑποτιθεὶς ταύτῃ πόσης
αὑτῷ δεῖν οἰήσεται παρασκευῆς<note place='foot'>παρασκευῆς Hertlein would read, τῆς παρασκευῆς MSS.</note> καὶ φρονήσεως
πηλίκης ὥστε τὰς ἐφ᾽ ἑκάτερα ῥοπάς, καθάπερ
πνεύματος κυβερνήτην, εὐσχημόνως φέρειν;
</p>

<p>
(how I ask shall we lead
him beyond the reach of Fortune and keep his
position secure? Then again, if he subject himself
to Fortune, how great the provision he will think
he must make, how great the prudence he must display
so as to sustain with equanimity her variations
in either direction, as a pilot must sustain the
variations of the wind!)
</p>

<p>
Οὐκ ἔστι θαυμαστὸν ἀντιτάξασθαι προσπολεμούσῃ
μόνον αὐτῇ, πολὺ δὲ θαυμασιώτερον<note place='foot'>θαυμασιώτερον MSS.; Hertlein following Cobet reads
θαυμαστότερον but in later Preface would restore MSS. reading.</note> τῶν
ὑπαρξάντων παρ᾽ αὐτῆς ἀγαθῶν ἄξιον φανῆναι.
τούτοις ὁ μέγιστος ἑάλω βασιλεὺς ὁ τὴν Ἀσίαν
<pb n='212'/><anchor id='Pg212'/><anchor id='Pg213'/>
καταστρεψάμενος [B] Δαρείου καὶ Ξέρξου χαλεπώτερος
καὶ μᾶλλον ἀλαζὼν φανείς, ἐπειδὴ τῆς
ἐκείνων ἀρχῆς κατέστη κύριος, τούτοις ἁλόντες
τοῖς βέλεσιν ἄρδην ἀπώλοντο Πέρσαι, Μακεδόνες,
ὁ τῶν Ἀθηναίων δῆμος, Συρακούσιοι, τὰ Λακεδαιμωνίων
τέλη, Ῥωμαίων στρατηγοὶ καὶ ἐπ᾽ αὐτοῖς
αὐτοκράτορες μυρίοι. πολὺ μῆκος ἂν γένοιτο
πάντας ἀπαριθμουμένῳ τοὺς διὰ πλοῦτον καὶ
νίκας καὶ τρυφὴν ἀπολομένους· ὅσοι δὲ ὑπὸ τῶν
δυσπραγιῶν ἐπικλυσθέντες δοῦλοι [C] μὲν ἀντ᾽ ἐλευθέρων,
ταπεινοὶ δὲ ἀντὶ γενναίων καὶ σφόδρα
εὐτελεῖς ἀντὶ τῶν πρόσθεν σεμνῶν ἅπασιν ὤφθησαν,
τί με χρὴ νῦν ὥσπερ ἐκ δέλτου μεταγράφοντα
καταλέγειν; εἰ γὰρ ὤφελεν ὁ τῶν ἀνθρώπων
βίος ἀπορεῖν παραδειγμάτων τοιούτων. ἀλλ᾽
οὔτε ἐστὶν οὔτ᾽ ἂν γένοιτό ποτε τῶν τοιούτων
ἐνδεὴς παραδειγμάτων, ἕως ἂν τὸ τῶν ἀνθρώπων
διαμένῃ γένος.
</p>

<p>
(Yet it is nothing wonderful to withstand Fortune
when she is merely hostile, but much more wonderful
is it to show oneself worthy of the favours she bestows.
By her favours the greatest of kings, the conqueror<note place='foot'>Alexander.</note>
of Asia was ensnared, and showed himself more cruel
and more insolent than Darius and Xerxes, after he
had become the master of their empire. The shafts
of her favours subdued and utterly destroyed the
Persians, the Macedonians, the Athenian nation,
Spartan magistrates, Roman generals, and countless absolute
monarchs besides. It would be an endless business
to enumerate all who have fallen victims to their
wealth and victories and luxury. And as for those
who, submerged by the tide of their misfortunes, from
free men have become slaves, who have been humbled
from their high estate after all their splendour and
become poor and mean in the eyes of all men, what
need now to go through the list of them as though I
were copying it from a written record? Would
that human life afforded no such instances! But it
does not nor ever will lack such, so long as the
race of man endures.)
</p>

<p>
[D] Ὅτι δὲ οὐκ ἐγὼ μόνος τὴν τύχην ἐπὶ πλεῖστον
ἐν τοῖς πρακτέοις κρατεῖν νενόμικα, λέγοιμ᾽ ἂν
ἤδη σοι τὰ τοῦ Πλάτωνος ἐκ τῶν θαυμασίων
Νόμων, εἰδότι μὲν καὶ διδάξαντί με, ἀπόδειξιν δὲ
ὥσπερ τοῦ μὴ ῥᾳθυμεῖν ποιούμενος παραγέγραφά
σοι τὴν ῥῆσιν ὧδέ πως ἔχουσαν. <q>Θεὸς μὲν
πάντα καὶ μετὰ θεοῦ τύχη καὶ καιρὸς τὰ ἀνθρώπινα
διακυβερνῶσι ξύμπαντα. ἡμερώτερον μὴν
τούτοις συγχωρῆσαι [258] τρίτον δεῖν ἕπεσθαι τέχνην.</q>
εἶτα ὁποῖον εἶναι χρὴ τὸν τεχνίτην καὶ δημιουργὸν
τῶν καλῶν πράξεων καὶ βασιλέα θεῖον<note place='foot'>θεῖον Hertlein suggests, θεὸν MSS.</note> ὑπογράφων·
<q>Γινώσκων ὁ Κρόνος ἄρα, καθάπερ
ἡμεῖς, φησί, διεληλύθαμεν, ὡς ἀνθρωπεία φύσις
<pb n='214'/><anchor id='Pg214'/><anchor id='Pg215'/>
οὐδαμῇ οὐδεμία ἱκανὴ τὰ ἀνθρώπινα διοικοῦσα
αὐτοκράτωρ πάντα μὴ οὐχ ὕβρεώς τε καὶ ἀδικίας
μεστοῦσθαι, [B] ταῦτ᾽ οὖν διανοούμενος ἐφίστη τότε
βασιλέας καὶ ἄρχοντας ταῖς πόλεσιν ἡμῶν οὐκ
ἀνθρώπους, ἀλλὰ γένους θειοτέρου καὶ ἀμείνονος,
δαίμονας, οἷον νῦν ἡμεῖς δρῶμεν τοῖς ποιμνίοις καὶ
ὅσων ἡμεροί εἰσιν ἀγέλαι· οὐ βοῦς βοῶν οὐδὲ αἶγας
αἰγῶν ἄρχοντας ποιοῦμεν αὐτοῖς τινας, ἀλλ᾽ ἡμεῖς
αὐτῶν δεσπόζομεν, ἄμεινον ἐκείνων γένος. ταὐτὸν
δὴ καὶ ὁ θεὸς φιλάνθρωπος ὢν γένος ἄμεινον ἡμῶν
ἐφίστη τὸ τῶν δαιμόνων, ὃ διὰ πολλῆς μὲν αὐτοῖς
ῥᾳστώνης, [C] διὰ πολλῆς δ᾽ ἡμῖν, ἐπιμελόμενον
ἡμῶν, εἰρήνην τε καὶ αἰδῶ καὶ δὴ ἀφθονίαν
δίκης παρεχόμενον, ἀστασίαστα καὶ εὐδαίμονα
τὰ τῶν ἀνθρώπων ἀπειργάζετο γένη. λέγει δὴ καὶ
νῦν οὗτος ὁ λόγος ἀληθείᾳ χρώμενος, ὅσων πόλεων
μὴ θεός, ἀλλά τις ἄρχει θνητός, οὐκ ἔστι
κακῶν αὐτοῖς οὐδὲ πόνων ἀνάψυξις· ἀλλὰ μιμεῖσθαι
δεῖν ἡμᾶς οἴεται πάσῃ μηχανῇ τὸν
ἐπὶ τοῦ Κρόνου λεγόμενον βίον, [D] καὶ ὅσον ἐν ἡμῖν
ἀθανασίας ἔνεστι, τούτῳ πειθομένους δημοσίᾳ
καὶ ἰδίᾳ τάς τε οἰκήσεις καὶ τὰς πόλεις διοικεῖν,
τὴν τοῦ νοῦ διανομὴν ὀνομάζοντας νόμον. εἰ δὲ
ἄνθρωπος εἷς ἢ ὀλιγαρχία τις ἢ δημοκρατία
ψυχὴν ἔχουσα ἡδονῶν καὶ ἐπιθυμιῶν ὀρεγομένην
καὶ πληροῦσθαι [259] τούτων δεομένην ἄρξει δὴ πόλεώς
τινος ἢ ἰδιώτου καταπατήσας τοὺς νόμους, οὐκ
ἔστι σωτηρίας μηχανή.</q>
</p>

<p>
(And to show that I am not the only one who
thinks that Fortune has the upper hand in practical
affairs, I will quote to you a passage from that
admirable work the Laws of Plato. You know it
well and indeed taught it to me, but I have set
down the speech which runs something like this,
and offer it as a proof that I am not really indolent.
<q>God governs all things and with God
Fortune and Opportunity govern all human affairs:
but there is a milder view that Art must needs go
with them and must be their associate.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Laws</hi> 709<hi rend='smallcaps'>b</hi>.</note> He then
indicates what must be the character of a man who is
the craftsman and artificer of noble deeds and a
divinely inspired king. Then he says: <q>Kronos therefore,
as I have already related, knew that human
nature when endowed with supreme authority is never
in any case capable of managing human affairs without
being filled with insolence and injustice; therefore,
having regard to this he at that time set over
our cities as kings and governors not men but beings
of a more divine and higher race, I mean demons; thus
doing as we do now for our flocks and domestic herds.
We never appoint certain oxen to rule over other
oxen or goats to rule over goats, but we are their
masters, a race superior to theirs. In like manner
then God, since he loves mankind, has set over us
a race of beings superior to ourselves, the race of
demons; and they with great ease both to themselves
and us undertake the care of us and dispense peace,
reverence, aye, and above all justice without stint,
and thus they make the tribes of men harmonious
and happy. And that account is a true one which
declares that in our day all cities that are governed not
by a god but by a mortal man have no relief from
evils and hardships. And the lesson is that we
ought by every means in our power to imitate that
life which is said to have existed in the days of
Kronos: and in so far as the principle of immortality
is in us we ought to be guided by it in our management
of public and private affairs, of our houses and
cities, calling the distribution of mind <q>law.</q><note place='foot'>A play on words: διανομὴ and νόμος are both connected
with νέμω = <q>to distribute.</q></note> But
whether the government be in the hands of one
man or of an oligarchy or democracy, if it have a
soul that hankers after pleasure and the lower appetites
and demands to indulge these, and if such a
one rule over a city or individual having first trampled
on the laws, there is no means of salvation.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Laws</hi> 713-714; Julian
condenses and slightly alters the original.</note>)
</p>

<pb n='216'/><anchor id='Pg216'/><anchor id='Pg217'/>

<p>
Ταύτην ἐγώ σοι τὴν ῥῆσιν ἐξεπίτηδες ὅλην
παρέγραφα, μή με κλέπτειν ὑπολάβῃς καὶ
κακουργεῖν μύθους ἀρχαίους προφέροντα, τυχὸν
μὲν ἐμφερῶς, οὐ μὴν ἀληθῶς πάντη ξυγκειμένους.
ἀλλ᾽ ὅ γε ἀληθὴς ὑπὲρ αὐτῶν λόγος
τί φησιν; ἀκούεις ὅτι, κἂν ἄνθρωπός τις ᾖ τῇ
φύσει, θεῖον εἶναι χρὴ τῇ προαιρέσει καὶ δαίμονα,
πᾶν ἅπλως ἐκβαλόντα τὸ θνητὸν καὶ
θηριῶδες τῆς ψυχῆς, [B] πλὴν ὅσα ἀνάγκη διὰ
τὴν τοῦ σώματος παραμένειν σωτηρίαν; ταῦτα
εἴ τις ἐννοῶν δέδοικεν ἐπὶ τηλικοῦτον ελκόμενος
βίον, ἆρά σοι φαίνεται τὴν Ἐπικούρειον
θαυμάζειν ἀπραγμοσύνην καὶ τοὺς κήπους καὶ
τὸ προάστειον τῶν Ἀθηνῶν<note place='foot'>Ἀθηνῶν Cobet, Ἀθηναίων Hertlein, MSS.</note> καὶ τὰς μυρρίνας
καὶ τὸ Σωκράτους δωμάτιον; ἀλλ᾽ οὐκ ἔστιν ὅπου
γε ἐγὼ ταῦτα προτιμήσας τῶν πόνων ὤφθην.
ἥδιστα ἄν σοι τοὺς ἐμαυτοῦ πόνους διεξῆλθον καὶ
τὰ ἐπικρεμασθέντα παρὰ τῶν φίλων καὶ ξυγγενῶν,
ὅτε τῆς παρ᾽ ὑμῖν [C] ἠρχόμην παιδείας, δείματα,
εἰ μὴ σφόδρα αὐτὸς ἠπίστασο. τὰ δὲ ἐν Ἰωνίᾳ
πρὸς τὸν καὶ γένει προσήκοντα καὶ φιλίᾳ μᾶλλον
οἰκεῖον ὄντα μοι πραχθέντα πρότερον ὑπὲρ ἀνδρὸς
ξένου μικρά παντελῶς γνωρίμου μοι γενομένου,
τοῦ σοφιστοῦ φημί, λέληθεν οὐδέν σε. ἀποδημίας
δὲ οὐχ ὑπέστην τῶν φίλων ἕνεκα; καίτοι Καρτερίῳ
μὲν οἶσθ᾽ ὅπως [D] συνηράμην πρὸς τὸν ἑταῖρον
ἡμῖν ἀφικόμενος Ἀράξιον ἄκλητος, ὑπὲρ αὐτοῦ
δεησόμενος. ὑπὲρ δὲ τῶν τῆς θαυμασίας Ἀρετῆς
κτημάτων καὶ ὧν ἐπεπόνθει παρὰ τῶν γειτόνων
<pb n='218'/><anchor id='Pg218'/><anchor id='Pg219'/>
οὐκ εἰς τὴν Φρυγίαν τὸ δεύτερον ἀφικόμην ἐν
οὐδὲ ὅλοις μησὶ δύο, ἀσθενοῦς ἤδη μοι παντελὼς
ὄντος τοῦ σώματος διὰ τὴν ἐπιγενομένην ὑπὸ τῆς
πρότερον κακοπαθείας ἀρρωστίαν; ἀλλὰ δὴ τὸ
τελευταῖον πρὸ τῆς εἰς τὴν Ἑλλάδα γενομένης
ἡμῖν ἀφίξεως, ὅτε περὶ τῶν ἐσχάτων, ὡς ἂν
εἴποιεν οἱ πολλοί, κινδυνεύων ἐγὼ τῷ στρατοπέδῳ
παρέμενον, [260] ὁποίας ἔγραφον ἐπιστολὰς πρὸς σὲ
νῦν ὑπομνήσθητι, μήποτε ὀδυρμῶν πλήρεις, μήτι
μικρὸν ἢ ταπεινὸν ἢ λίαν ἀγεννὲς ἐχούσας.
ἀπιὼν δὲ ἐπὶ τὴν Ἑλλάδα πάλιν, ὅτε με φεύγειν
ἐνόμιζον πάντες, οὐχ ὡς ἐν ἑορτῇ τῇ μεγίστῃ
τὴν τύχην ἐπαινῶν ἡδίστην ἔφην εἶναι τὴν ἀμοιβὴν
ἐμοὶ [B] καὶ τὸ δὴ λεγόμενον
</p>

<p>
(I have purposely set down the whole of this speech
for you lest you should think that I am cheating and
defrauding by bringing forward ancient myths which
may have some resemblance to the truth, but on
the whole are not composed with regard to truth.
But what is the true meaning of this narrative? You
hear what it says, that even though a prince be
by nature human, he must in his conduct be divine
and a demi-god and must completely banish from
his soul all that is mortal and brutish, except what
must remain to safeguard the needs of the body.
Now if, reflecting on this, one is afraid to be constrained
to adopt a life from which so much is
expected, do you therefore conclude that one admires
the inaction recommended by Epicurus, the
gardens and suburbs of Athens and its myrtles, or
the humble home of Socrates? But never has anyone
seen me prefer these to a life of toil. That toil
of mine I would willingly recount to you, and the
hazards that threatened me from my friends and
kinsfolk at the time when I began to study under
you, if you did not yourself know them well enough.
You are well aware of what I did, in the first place,
in Ionia in opposition to one who was related to me
by ties of blood, but even more closely by ties of
friendship, and that in behalf of a foreigner with
whom I was very slightly acquainted, I mean the
sophist. Did I not endure to leave the country for the
sake of my friends? Indeed, you know how I took
the part of Carterius when I went unsolicited to our
friend Araxius to plead for him. And in behalf of the
property of that admirable woman Arete and the
wrongs she had suffered from her neighbours, did I
not journey to Phrygia for the second time within
two months, though I was physically very weak from
the illness that had been brought on by former
fatigues?<note place='foot'>We know nothing more of the events here mentioned.</note> Finally, before I went to Greece, while I
was still with the army and running what most
people would call the greatest possible risks, recall
now what sort of letters I wrote to you, never
filled with complaints or containing anything little
or mean or servile. And when I returned to Greece,
when everyone regarded me as an exile, did I not
welcome my fate as though it were some high festival,
and did I not say that the exchange to me was most
delightful, and that, as the saying is, I had thereby
gained)
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<lg>
<l>χρύσεα χαλκείων, ἑκατόμβοι᾽ ἐννεαβοίων</l>
</lg>

<p>
(<q>gold for bronze, the price of a hundred
oxen for the price of nine</q>?<note place='foot'>A proverb derived from <hi rend='italic'>Iliad</hi> 6. 236, where Glaukos exchanges
his golden armour for the bronze armour of Diomede.</note>)
</p>

</quote>

<p>
ἔφην ἀντηλλάχθαι; οὕτως ἀντὶ τῆς ἐμαυτοῦ
ἑστίας τὴν Ἑλλάδα λαχὼν ἐγανύμην, οὐχ ἀγρόν,
οὐ κῆπον, οὐ δωμάτιον ἐκεῖ κεκτημένος.
</p>

<p>
So great was my joy
at obtaining the chance to live in Greece instead of
in my own home, though I possessed there no land
or garden or the humblest house.
</p>

<p>
Ἁλλὰ ἴσως ἔοικα ἐγὼ τὰς μὲν δυσπραγίας οὐκ
ἀγεννῶς φέρειν, πρὸς δὲ τὰς παρὰ τῆς τύχης
δωρεὰς ἀγεννής τις εἶναι καὶ μικρός, ὅ γε ἀγαπῶν
τὰς Ἀθήνας μᾶλλον τοῦ νῦν περὶ ἡμᾶς ὄγκου, τὴν
σχολὴν δήπουθεν ἐκείνην ἐπαινῶν, διὰ δὲ τὸ
[C] πλῆθος τῶν πράξεων τοῦτον αἰτιώμενος τὸν βίον;
ἀλλὰ μή ποτε χρὴ περὶ ἡμῶν ἄμεινον κρίνειν, οὐκ
εἰς ἀπραξίαν καὶ πρᾶξιν βλέποντας, μᾶλλον δὲ εἰς
τὸ Γνῶθι σαυτὸν καὶ τὸ
</p>

<p>
(But perhaps you think that though I can bear
adversity in the proper spirit, yet I show a poor
and mean spirit towards the good gifts of Fortune,
seeing that I prefer Athens to the pomp that now
surrounds me; because, you will doubtless say, I
approve the leisure of those days and disparage my
present life because of the vast amount of work that
the latter involves. But perhaps you ought to judge
of me more accurately, and not consider the question
whether I am idle or industrious, but rather the
precept, <q>Know thyself,</q> and the saying,)
</p>
<quote rend='display'>

<lg>
<l>Ἔρδοι δ᾽ ἕκαστος ἥντιν᾽ εἰδείη τέχνην.</l>
</lg>

<p>
(<q>Let
every man practise the craft which he knows.</q><note place='foot'>Aristophanes, <hi rend='italic'>Wasps</hi> 1431.</note>)
</p>

</quote>

<pb n='220'/><anchor id='Pg220'/><anchor id='Pg221'/>

<p>
Μεῖζον ἔμοιγε φαίνεται τὸ βασιλεύειν ἢ κατ᾽
ἄνθρωπον καὶ φύσεως δεῖσθαι δαιμονιωτέρας
βασιλεύς, [D] ὥσπερ οὖν καὶ Πλάτων ἔλεγε· καὶ νῦν
Ἀριστοτέλους εἰς ταῦτὸ συντείνοντα παραγράψω
λόγον, οὐ γλαῦκα Ἀθηναίοις ἄγων, ἀλλ᾽ ὅτι μὴ
παντάπασιν ἀμελῶ τῶν ἐκείνου λόγων ἐπιδεικνύμενος.
φησὶ δὲ ὁ ἀνὴρ ἐν τοῖς πολιτικοῖς συγγράμμασιν·
<q>Εἱ δὲ δή τις ἄριστον θείη τὸ
βασιλεύεσθαι ταῖς πόλεσι, τῶς ἕξει τὰ περὶ τῶν
τέκνων; πότερον καὶ τὸ γένος δεῖ βασιλεύειν;
ἀλλὰ γιγνομένων ὁποῖοί τινες ἔτυχον, βλαβερόν.
ἀλλὰ οὐ παραδώσει [261] κύριος ὢν τοῖς τέκνοις; ἀλλ᾽
οὐκ ἔτι ῥᾴδιον τοῦτο πιστεῦσαι· χαλεπὸν γὰρ
καὶ μείζονος ἀρετῆς ἢ κατ᾽ ἀνθρωπίνην φύσιν.</q>
ἑξῆς δὲ περὶ τοῦ κατὰ νόμον λεγομένου βασιλέως
διεξελθών, ὡς<note place='foot'>ὡς Klimek, ὅς Hertlein, MSS.</note> ἐστὶν ὑπηρέτης καὶ φύλαξ τῶν
νόμων, καὶ τοῦτον οὐδὲ βασιλέα καλῶν, οὐδὲ τὸν
τοιοῦτον εἶδος πολιτείας<note place='foot'>τὸν τοιοῦτον εἶδος πολιτείας Hertlein suggests, cf. Aristotle
<hi rend='italic'>Politics</hi> 3. 16, 1287 a, τὸ τοιοῦτον εἶδος MSS.</note> οἰόμενος, προστίθησι·
<q>[B] Περὶ δὲ τῆς παμβασιλείας καλουμένης, αὕτη δ᾽
ἐστὶ καθ᾽ ἣν ἄρχει πάντων κατὰ τὴν αὑτοῦ βούλησιν
ὁ βασιλεύς, δοκεῖ τισιν οὐδὲ κατὰ φύσιν εἶναι
τὸ κύριον ἕνα πάντων εἶναι τῶν πολιτῶν· τοῖς
γὰρ ὁμοίοις φύσει τὸ αὐτὸ δίκαιον ἀναγκαῖον
εἶναι.</q> εἶτα μετ᾽ ὀλίγον φησίν· <q>Ὁ μὲν οὖν τὸν
νοῦν κελεύων ἄρχειν δοκεῖ κελεύειν ἄρχειν τὸν
θεὸν καὶ τοὺς νόμους· ὁ δὲ ἄνθρωπον κελεύων
<pb n='222'/><anchor id='Pg222'/><anchor id='Pg223'/>
προστίθησι καὶ θηρία· [C] ἥ τε γὰρ ἐπιθυμία τοιοῦτον
καὶ ὁ θυμὸς ὃς<note place='foot'>ὃς Hertlein would add.</note> διαστρέφει καὶ τοὺς ἀρίστους
ἄνδρασ· διόπερ ἄνευ ὀρέξεως ὁ νοῦς νόμος ἐστίν.</q>
ὁρᾷς, ὁ φιλόσοφος ἔοικεν ἐνταῦθα σαφῶς ἀπιστοῦντι
καὶ κατεγνωκότι τῆς ἀνθρωπίνης φύσεως.
φησὶ γὰρ οὕτω ῥήματι τοῦτο λέγων· οὐδεμίαν
ἀξιόχρεων εἶναι φύσιν ἀνθρωπίνην πρὸς τοσαύτην
τύχης ὑπεροχήν· [D] οὔτε γὰρ τῶν παίδων τὸ κοινῇ
τοῖς πολίταις συμφέρον προτιμᾶν ἄνθρωπόν γε
ὄντα ῥᾴδιον ὑπολαμβάνει, καὶ πολλῶν ὁμοίων
ἄρχειν οὐ δίκαιον εἶναί φησι, καὶ τέλος ἐπιθεὶς τὸν
κολοφῶνα τοῖς ἔμπροσθεν λόγοις νόμον μὲν εἶναί
φησι τὸν νοῦν χωρὶς ὀρέξεως, ᾧ μόνῳ τὰς
πολιτείας ἐπιτρέπειν χρῆναι, ἀνδρῶν δὲ οὐδενί. ὁ
γὰρ ἐν αὐτοῖς νοῦς, κἂν ὦσιν ἀγαθοί, συμπέπλεκται
θυμῷ καὶ ἐπιθυμίᾳ, θηρίοις χαλεπωτάτοις.
ταῦτα ἐμοὶ [262] δοκεῖ τοῖς τοῦ Πλάτωνος ἄκρως
ὁμολογεῖν, πρῶτον μὲν ὅτι κρείττονα χρὴ τῶν
ἀρχομένων εἶναι τὸν ἄρχοντα, οὐκ ἐπιτηδεύσει
μόνον, ἀλλὰ καὶ φύσει διαφέροντα· ὅπερ εὑρεῖν
ἐν ἀνθρώποις οὐ ῥᾴδιον·<note place='foot'>Several words indicating the second point enumerated
seem to have been lost.</note> ... καὶ τρίτον ὅτι πάσῃ
μηχανῇ κατὰ δύναμιν νόμοις προσεκτέον οὐκ ἐκ τοῦ
παραχρῆμα κειμένοις οὐδὲ ὡς ἔοικε νῦν τεθεῖσιν
ὑπ᾽ ἀνδρῶν οὐ πάντη κατὰ νοῦν βεβιωκότων, ἀλλ᾽
ὅστις μᾶλλον τὸν νοῦν καθαρθεὶς καὶ τὴν ψυχὴν
οὐκ εἰς τὰ παρόντα [B] ἀφορῶν ἀδικήματα οὐδὲ εἰς
<pb n='224'/><anchor id='Pg224'/><anchor id='Pg225'/>
τὰς παρεστώσας τύχας τίθησι τοὺς νόμους, ἀλλὰ
τὴν τῆς πολιτείας φύσιν καταμαθὼν καὶ τὸ
δίκαιον οἷόν<note place='foot'>οἷόν Hertlein suggests, ὃ MSS.</note> ἐστι τῇ φύσει καὶ ποταπόν ἐστι
τἀδίκημα τεθεαμένος τῇ φύσει, εἶθ᾽ ὅσα δυνατὸν
ἐστιν ἐκεῖθεν ἐνταῦθα μεταφέρων καὶ τιθεὶς νόμους
τοῖς πολίταις κοινούς, οὔτε εἰς φιλίαν οὔτε εἰς
ἔχθραν ἀφορῶν [C] οὔτε εἰς γείτονα καὶ ξυγγενῆ·
κρεῖσσον δέ, εἰ μηδὲ τοῖς καθ᾽ ἑαυτὸν ἀνθρώποις,
ἀλλὰ τοῖς ὕστερον ἢ ξένοις γράψας ἀποπέμποι
νόμους, ἔχων γε οὐδὲν οὐδὲ ἐλπίζων πρὸς αὐτοὺς
ἕξειν ἰδιωτικὸν συνάλλαγμα. ἐπεὶ καὶ τὸν Σόλωνα
τὸν σοφὸν ἀκούω μετὰ τῶν φίλων συμβουλευσάμενον
ὑπὲρ τῆς τῶν χρεῶν ἀναιρέσεως τοῖς μὲν
εὐπορίας ἀφορμήν, αὑτῷ δὲ αἰσχύνης αἰτίαν παρασχεῖν,
καὶ ταῦτα τῷ πολιτεύματι τὸν δῆμον ἐλευθερώσαντα.
οὕτως [D] οὐ ῥᾴδιόν ἐστι τὰς τοιαύτας
ἐκφυγεῖν κῆρας, κἂν τὸν αὑτοῦ νοῦν παράσχῃ τις
ἀπαθῆ πρὸς τὴν πολιτείαν.
</p>

<p>
(To me, at any rate, it seems that the task of
reigning is beyond human powers, and that a king
needs a more divine character, as indeed Plato too
used to say. And now I will write out a passage
from Aristotle to the same effect, not <q>bringing owls
to the Athenians,</q><note place='foot'>A proverb; cf. <q>bringing coals to Newcastle.</q></note> but in order to show you that I
do not entirely neglect his writings. In his political
treatises he says: <q>Now even if one maintain the
principle that it is best for cities to be governed by
a king, how will it be about his children? Ought
his children to succeed him? And yet if they
prove to be no better than anybody else, that would
be a bad thing for the city. But you may say,
though he has the power he will not leave the
succession to his children? It is difficult indeed to
believe that he will not; for that would be too hard
for him, and demands a virtue greater than belongs
to human nature.</q><note place='foot'>Aristotle, <hi rend='italic'>Politics</hi> 3. 15. 1286<hi rend='smallcaps'>b</hi>.</note> And later on, when he is
describing a so-called king who rules according to
law, and says that he is both the servant and
guardian of the laws, he does not call him a king at
all, nor does he consider such a king as a distinct
form of government; and he goes on to say: <q>Now
as for what is called absolute monarchy, that is to say,
when a king governs all other men according to his
own will, some people think that it is not in
accordance with the nature of things for one man
to have absolute authority over all the citizens;
since those who are by nature equal must necessarily
have the same rights.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid</hi> 3. 16. 1287<hi rend='smallcaps'>a</hi>.</note> Again, a little later he says:
<q>It seems, therefore, that he who bids Reason rule
is really preferring the rule of God and the laws,
but he who bids man rule, adds an element of
the beast. For desire is a wild beast, and passion
which warps even the best men. It follows, therefore,
that law is Reason exempt from desire.</q> You
see the philosopher seems here clearly to distrust
and condemn human nature. For he says
so in so many words when he asserts that human
nature is in no case worthy of such an excess of
fortune. For he thinks that it is too hard for one
who is merely human to prefer the general weal of
the citizens to his own children; he says that it is
not just that one man should rule over many who
are his equals; and, finally, he puts the finishing
stroke<note place='foot'>Cf. Plato, <hi rend='italic'>Theaetetus</hi> 153.</note> to what he has just said when he asserts that
<q>law is Reason exempt from desire,</q> and that
political affairs ought to be entrusted to Reason
alone, and not to any individual man whatever. For
the reason that is in men, however good they may
be, is entangled with passion and desire, those most
ferocious monsters. These opinions, it seems to me,
harmonise perfectly with Plato's; first, that he who
governs ought to be superior to his subjects and
surpass them not only in his acquired habits but also
in natural endowment; a thing which is not easy to
find among men;... thirdly, that he ought by every
means in his power to observe the laws, not those
that were framed to meet some sudden emergency,
or established, as now appears, by men whose lives
were not wholly guided by reason; but he must
observe them only in case the lawgiver, having
purified his mind and soul, in enacting those laws
keeps in view not merely the crimes of the moment
or immediate contingencies; but rather recognises
the nature of government and the essential nature of
justice, and has carefully observed also the essential
nature of guilt, and then applies to his task all the
knowledge thus derived, and frames laws which
have a general application to all the citizens without
regard to friend or foe, neighbour or kinsman. And
it is better that such a lawgiver should frame and
promulgate his laws not for his contemporaries only
but for posterity also, or for strangers with whom he
neither has nor expects to have any private dealings.
For instance, I hear that the wise Solon, having
consulted his friends about the cancelling of debts,
furnished them with an opportunity to make money,
but brought on himself a disgraceful accusation.<note place='foot'>Before Solon's measure to cancel debts was generally
known, some of his friends borrowed large sums, knowing
that they would not have to repay them.</note>
So hard is it to avoid such fatalities, even when
a man brings a passionless mind to the task of
governing.)
</p>

<p>
Ἃ δεδιὼς ἐγὼ πολλάκις εἰκότως ἐπαινῶ τὸν ἔμπροσθεν
βίον, καὶ σοὶ πειθόμενος μάλιστα ταῦτα
ἐγὼ διανοοῦμαι, οὐχ ὅτι μοι τὸν ζῆλον πρὸς
ἐκείνους μόνον ἔφης προκεῖσθαι τοὺς ἄνδρας,
Σόλωνα καὶ Λυκοῦργον καὶ Πιττακόν, ἀλλὰ καὶ
ὅτι μεταβῆναί με φὴς ἐκ τῆς ὑποστέγου φιλοσοφίας
πρὸς τὴν ὑπαίθριον. [263] ὥσπερ οὖν, εἰ τῷ
χαλεπῶς καὶ μόλις ὑγιείας ἕνεκα τῆς αὑτοῦ γυμναζομένῳ
μετρίως οἴκαδε προύλεγες, ὅτι <q>Νῦν
ἥκεις εἰς Ὀλυμπίαν καὶ μεταβέβηκας ἐκ τῆς ἐν
τῷ δωματίῳ παλαίστρας ἐπὶ τὸ στάδιον τοῦ Διός,
οὗ θεατὰς ἕξεις τούς τε ἁπανταχόθεν Ἕλληνας
<pb n='226'/><anchor id='Pg226'/><anchor id='Pg227'/>
καὶ πρώτους γε τοὺς σαυτοῦ πολίτας, ὑπὲρ ὧν
ἀγωνίζεσθαι χρή, τινὰς δὲ καὶ τῶν βαρβάρων,
οὓς ἐκπλῆξαι χρεών, φοβερωτέραν αὐτοῖς τὴν
πατρίδα όο γε εἰς σὲ νῦν ἧκον ἐπιδείξαντα,</q> κατέβαλες
ἂν εὐθέως καὶ τρέμειν ἐποίησας πρὸ τῆς
ἀγωνίας· [B] οὕτω κἀμὲ νῦν νόμιζε διατεθῆναι τοῖς
τοιούτοις λόγοις. καὶ περὶ μὲν τούτων εἴτε ὀρθῶς
ἔγνωκα νῦν εἴτε ἐν μέρει σφάλλομαι τοῦ προσήκοντος
εἴτε καὶ τοῦ παντὸς διαμαρτάνω, διδάξεις
αὐτίκα μάλα.
</p>

<p>
(And since this sort of thing is what I dread, it is
natural that I should often dwell on the advantages
of my previous mode of life, and I am but obeying
you when I reflect that you said not only that I
must emulate those famous men Solon, Lycurgus
and Pittacus, but also that I must now quit the
shades of philosophy for the open air. This is as
though you had announced to a man who for his
health's sake and by exerting himself to the utmost
was able to take moderate exercise at home: <q>Now
you have come to Olympia and have exchanged the
gymnasium in your house for the stadium of Zeus,
where you will have for spectators Greeks who have
come from all parts, and foremost among them your
own fellow-citizens, on whose behalf you must enter
the lists; and certain barbarians will be there also
whom it is your duty to impress, showing them your
fatherland in as formidable a light as lies in your
power.</q> You would have disconcerted him at once
and made him nervous before the games began.
You may now suppose that I have been affected in
the same manner by just such words from you. And
you will very soon inform me whether my present
view is correct, or whether I am in part deceived as
to my proper course or whether indeed I am wholly
mistaken.)
</p>

<p>
[C] Ὑπὲρ δὲ ὧν ἀπορῆσαί μοι πρὸς τὴν ἐπιστολὴν
τὴν σὴν παρέστη, ὦ φίλη κεφαλὴ καὶ πάσης
ἔμοιγε τιμῆς ἀξία, βούλομαι δηλῶσαι· σαφέστερον
γάρ πως ὑπὲρ αὐτῶν ἐπιθυμῶ μαθεῖν. ἔφησθα
ὅτι τὸν ἐν τῇ πράξει παρὰ τὸν φιλόσοφον ἐπαινεῖς
βίον, καὶ τὸν Ἀριστοτέλη τὸν σοφὸν ἐκάλεις
μάρτυρα, τὴν εὐδαιμονίαν ἐν τῷ πράττειν εὖ τιθέμενον,
καὶ τὴν διαφορὰν σκοποῦντα τοῦ τε πολιτικοῦ
βίου καὶ τῆς ἐν τῇ θεωρίᾳ ζωῆς, διαπορεῖν
ἄττα περὶ αὐτῶν, καὶ τὴν μὲν θεωρίαν ἐν ἄλλοις
προτιμᾶν, ἐπαινεῖν δὲ ἐνταῦθα τοὺς τῶν καλῶν
πράξεων ἀρχιτέκτονας. [D] τούτους δὲ αὐτὸς μὲν
εἶναι φὴς τοὺς βασιλέας, Ἀριστοτέλης δὲ εἴρηκεν
οὐδαμοῦ κατὰ τὴν ὑπὸ σοῦ προστεθεῖσαν λέξιν,
πλέον δὲ θάτερον ἐξ ὧν παραγέγραφας ἄν τις
νοήσειε. τὸ γὰρ <q>Μάλιστα δὲ πράττειν λέγομεν
κυρίως καὶ τῶν ἐξωτερικῶν πράξεων τοὺς ταῖς
διανοίαις ἀρχιτέκτονας</q> εἰς τοὺς νομοθέτας καὶ
<pb n='228'/><anchor id='Pg228'/><anchor id='Pg229'/>
τοὺς πολιτικοὺς φιλοσόφους καὶ πάντας ἁπλῶς
τοὺς νῷ τε καὶ λόγῳ πράττοντας, οὐχὶ δὲ εἰς τοὺς
αὐτουργοὺς [264] καὶ τῶν πολιτικῶν πράξεων ἐργάτας
εἰρῆσθαι νομιστέον· οἷς οὐκ ἀπόχρη μόνον ἐνθυμηθῆναι
καὶ κατανοῆσαι καὶ τὸ πρακτέον τοῖς
ἄλλοις φράσαι, προσήκει δὲ αὐτοῖς ἕκαστα μεταχειρίζεσθαι
καὶ πράττειν ὧν οἱ νόμοι διαγορεύουσι
καὶ πολλάκις οἱ καιροὶ προσαναγκάζουσι, πλὴν
εἰ μὴ τὸν ἀρχιτέκτονα καλοῦμεν, καθάπερ Ὅμηρος
τὸν Ἡρακλέα καλεῖν εἴωθεν ἐν τῇ ποιήσει <q>μεγάλων
ἐπιίστορα ἔργων,</q> αὐτουργότατον ἁπάντων
γενόμενον.
</p>

<p>
(But I should like to make clear to you the points
in your letter by which I am puzzled, my dearest
friend to whom I especially am bound to pay
every honour: for I am eager to be more precisely
informed about them. You said that you approve
a life of action rather than the philosophic life,
and you called to witness the wise Aristotle who
defines happiness as virtuous activity, and discussing
the difference between the statesman's life and the
life of contemplation, showed a certain hesitation
about those lives, and though in others of his writings
he preferred the contemplative life, in this place you
say he approves the architects of noble actions. But
it is you who assert that these are kings, whereas
Aristotle does not speak in the sense of the words that
you have introduced: and from what you have quoted
one would rather infer the contrary. For when he
says: <q>We most correctly use the word <q>act</q> of those
who are the architects of public affairs by virtue of
their intelligence,</q><note place='foot'>Aristotle, <hi rend='italic'>Politics</hi> 7. 3. 1325<hi rend='smallcaps'>b</hi>.</note> we must suppose that what he
says applies to lawgivers and political philosophers
and all whose activity consists in the use of intelligence
and reason, but that it does not apply to those
who do the work themselves and those who transact
the business of politics. But in their case it is not
enough that they should consider and devise and
instruct others as to what must be done, but it is
their duty to undertake and execute whatever the
laws ordain and circumstances as well often force
them; unless indeed we call that man an architect
who is <q>well versed in mighty deeds,</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Odyssey</hi> 21. 26.</note> a phrase
which Homer in his poems usually applies to
Heracles, who was indeed of all men that ever
lived most given to do the work himself.)
</p>

<p>
[B] Εἰ δὲ τοῦτ᾽ ἀληθὲς ὑπολαμβάνομεν ἢ καὶ μόνον
ἐν τῇ πράττειν τὰ κοινά φαμεν εὐδαίμονας τοὺς
κυρίους<note place='foot'>ἐν τῷ πράττειν ... τοὺς κυρίους Hertlein suggests, τοὺς ἐν
τῷ πράττειν ... κυρίους MSS.</note> ὄντας καὶ βασιλεύοντας πολλῶν, τί ποτε
περὶ Σωκράτους ἐροῦμεν; Πυθαγόραν δὲ καὶ
Δημόκριτον καὶ τὸν Κλαζομένιον Ἀναξαγόραν
ἴσως διὰ τὴν θεωρίαν κατ᾽ ἄλλο φήσεις εὐδαίμονας·
Σωκράτης δὲ τὴν θεωρίαν παραιτησάμενος
καὶ τὸν πρακτικὸν ἀγαπήσας βίον οὐδὲ τῆς γαμετῆς
ἦν τῆς αὑτοῦ κύριος οὐδὲ τοῦ παιδός· [C] ἦπού
γε δυοῖν ἢ τριῶν πολιτῶν ἐκείνῳ κρατεῖν ὑπῆρχεν;
ἆρ᾽ οὖν οὐκ ἦν ἐκεῖνος πρακτικός, ἐπεὶ μηδενὸς ἦν
κύριος; ἐγὼ μὲν οὖν Ἀλεξάνδρου φημὶ μείζονα
τὸν Σωφρονίσκου κατεργάσασθαι, τὴν Πλάτωνος
αὐτῷ σοφίαν ἀνατιθείς, τὴν Ξενοφῶντος στρατηγίαν,
τὴν Ἀντισθένους ἀνδρείαν, τὴν Ἐρετρικὴν
φιλοσοφίαν, τὴν Μεγαρικήν, τὸν Κέβητα,
<pb n='230'/><anchor id='Pg230'/><anchor id='Pg231'/>
τὸν Σιμμίαν, [D] τὸν Φαίδωνα, μυρίους ἄλλους· καὶ
οὔπω φημὶ τὰς γενομένας ἡμῖν ἐνθένδ᾽ ἀποικίας,
τὸ Λύκειον, τὴν Στοάν, τὰς Ἀκαδημείας. τίς οὖν
ἐσώθη διὰ τὴν Ἀλεξάνδρου νίκην; τίς πόλις
ἄμεινον ᾠκήθη; τίς αὑτοῦ γέγονε βελτίων ἰδιώτης
ἀνήρ; πλουσιωτέρους μὲν γὰρ πολλοὺς ἂν
εὕροις, σοφώτερον δὲ οὐδένα οὐδὲ σωφρονέστερον
αὐτὸν αὑτοῦ, εἰ μὴ καὶ μᾶλλον ἀλαζόνα καὶ
ὑπερόπτην. ὅσοι δὲ σώζονται νῦν ἐκ φιλοσοφίας,
διὰ τὸν Σωκράτη σώζονται. καὶ τοῦτο οὐκ ἐγὼ
μόνος, [265] Ἀριστοτέλης δὲ πρότερος<note place='foot'>πρότερος Hertlein suggests, πρότερον MSS.</note> ἔοικεν ἐννοήσας
εἰπεῖν, ὅτι μὴ μεῖον αὐτῷ προσήκει φρονεῖν ἐπὶ τῆς
θεολογικῇ συγγραφῇ τοῦ καθελόντος τὴν Περσῶν
δύναμιν. καί μοι δοκεῖ τοῦτο ἐκεῖνος ὀρθῶς ξυννοῆσαι·
νικᾶν μὲν γὰρ ἀνδρείας ἐστὶ μάλιστα καὶ
τῆς τύχης, κείσθω δέ, εἰ βούλει, καὶ τῆς ἐντρεχοῦς
ταύτης φρονήσεως, ἀληθεῖς δὲ ὑπὲρ τοῦ θεοῦ δόξας
ἀναλαβεῖν οὐκ ἀρετῆς μόνον τῆς τελείας ἔργον
ἐστίν, [B] ἀλλ᾽ ἐπιστήσειεν ἄν τις εἰκότως, πότερον
χρὴ τὸν τοιοῦτον ἄνδρα ἢ θεὸν καλεῖν. εἰ γὰρ
ὀρθῶς ἔχει τὸ λεγόμενον, ὅτι πέφυκεν ἕκαστον
ὑπὸ τῶν οἰκείων γνωρίζεσθαι, τὴν θείαν οὐσίαν ὁ
γνωρίσας θεῖός τις ἂν εἰκότως νομίζοιτο.
</p>

<p>
(But if we conceive this to be true, or that only
those are happy who administer public affairs and who
are in authority and rule over many, what then are
we to say about Socrates? As for Pythagoras and
Democritus and Anaxagoras of Clazomenae, you will
perhaps say that they were happy in another sense
of the word, because of their philosophic speculations.
But as for Socrates who, having rejected the speculative
life and embraced a life of action, had no authority
over his own wife or his son, can we say of him that he
governed even two or three of his fellow-citizens?
Then will you assert that since he had no authority
over any one he accomplished nothing? On the
contrary I maintain that the son of Sophroniscus<note place='foot'>The father of Socrates.</note>
performed greater tasks than Alexander, for to him
I ascribe the wisdom of Plato, the generalship of
Xenophon, the fortitude of Antisthenes, the Eretrian<note place='foot'>This school was founded by Phaedo in Elis and later was
transferred by Menedemus to Eretria.</note>
and Megarian<note place='foot'>The Megarian school founded by Euclid was finally
absorbed by the Cynics.</note> philosophies, Cebes, Simmias,<note place='foot'>Simmias and Cebes were Pythagoreans; cf. Plato, <hi rend='italic'>Phaedo</hi>,
where they discuss with Socrates.</note> Phaedo
and a host of others; not to mention the offshoots
derived from the same source, the Lyceum, the Stoa
and the Academies. Who, I ask, ever found salvation
through the conquests of Alexander? What city
was ever more wisely governed because of them, what
individual improved? Many indeed you might find
whom those conquests enriched, but not one whom
they made wiser or more temperate than he was by
nature, if indeed they have not made him more
insolent and arrogant. Whereas all who now find
their salvation in philosophy owe it to Socrates.
And I am not the only person to perceive this fact
and to express it, for Aristotle it seems did so before
me, when he said that he had just as much right to
be proud of his treatise on the gods as the conqueror<note place='foot'>Alexander; Julian seems to be misquoting Plutarch,
<hi rend='italic'>Moralia</hi> 78 <hi rend='smallcaps'>d</hi>.</note>
of the Persian empire. And I think he was perfectly
correct in that conclusion. For military success is
due to courage and good fortune more than anything
else or, let us say, if you wish, to intelligence
as well, though of the common everyday sort. But
to conceive true opinions about God is an achievement
that not only requires perfect virtue, but one might
well hesitate whether it be proper to call one who
attains to this a man or a god. For if the saying is
true that it is the nature of everything to become
known to those who have an affinity with it, then
he who comes to know the essential nature of God
would naturally be considered divine.)
</p>

<pb n='232'/><anchor id='Pg232'/><anchor id='Pg233'/>

<p>
Ἀλλ᾽ ἐπειδὴ πάλιν ἐοίκαμεν εἰς τὸν θεωρηματικὸν
ὁρμήσαντες βίον τούτῳ παραβάλλειν τὸν
πρακτικόν, ἐξ ἐρχῆς παραιτησαμένου καὶ σοῦ τὴν
σύγκρισιν, [C] αὐτῶν ἐκείνων, ὧν ἐπεμνήσθης, Ἀρείου,
Νικολάου, Θρασύλλου καὶ Μουσωνίου μνημονεύσω.
τούτων γὰρ οὐχ ὅπως τις ἦν κύριος τῆς
αὑτοῦ πόλεως, ἀλλ᾽ ὁ μὲν Ἄρειος, ὡς φασί, καὶ
διδομένην αὐτῷ τὴν Αἴγυπτον ἐπιτροπεῦσαι
παρῃτήσατο, Θράσυλλος δὲ Τιβερίῳ πικρῷ καὶ
φύσει χαλεπῷ τυράννῳ ξυγγενόμενος, εἰ μὴ διὰ
τῶν καταλειφθέντων ὑπ᾽ αὐτοῦ λόγων ἀπελογήσατο,
δείξας ὅστις ἦν, [D] ὦφλεν ἂν εἰς τέλος αἰσχύνην
ἀναπάλλακτον, οὕτως αὐτὸν οὐδὲν ὤνησεν ἡ
πολιτεία, Νικόλαος δὲ πράξεων μὲν οὐ μεγάλων
αὐτουργὸς γέγονε γνώριμος δέ ἐστι μὰλλον διὰ
τοὺς ὑπὲρ αὐτῶν λόγους, καὶ Μουσώνιος ἐξ ὧν
ἔπαθεν ἀνδρείως καὶ νὴ Δί᾽ ἤνεγκεν ἐγκρατῶς τὴν
τῶν τυράννων ὠμότητα γέγονε γνώριμος, ἴσως οὐκ
ἔλαττον εὐδαιμονῶν ἐκείνων τῶν τὰς μεγάλας
ἐπιτροπευσάντων βασιλείας. Ἄρειος δὲ ὁ τὴν
ἐπιτροπὴν [266] τῆς Αἰγύπτου παραιτησάμενος ἑκὼν
αὑτὸν ἀπεστέρει τοῦ κρατίστου τέλους εἰ τοῦτ᾽
ᾤετο κυριώτατον. σὺ δὲ αὐτὸς ἡμῖν ἄπρακτος εἶ,
μήτε στρατηγῶν μήτε δημηγορῶν μήτε ἔθνους ἢ
πόλεως ἄρχων; ἀλλ᾽ οὐκ ἂν φαίη νοῦν ἔχων
ἁνήρ. ἔξεστι γάρ σοι φιλοσόφους πολλοὺς ἀποφήναντι,
εἰ δὲ μή, τρεῖς ἢ τέτταρας μείζονα τὸν
βίον εὐεργετῆσαι τῶν ἀνθρώπων πολλῶν ὁμοῦ
βασιλέων. [B] οὐ μικρᾶς γὰρ μερίδος ὁ φιλόσοφος
<pb n='234'/><anchor id='Pg234'/><anchor id='Pg235'/>
προέστηκεν, οὐδέ, καθάπερ ἔφης, συμβουλῆς ἐστι
μόνης τῆς ὑπὲρ τῶν κοινῶν ἐκεῖνος κύριος, οὐδὲ ἡ
πρᾶξις εἰς λόγον αὖθις αὐτῷ περιίσταται, ἔργῳ δὲ
βεβαιῶν τοὺς λόγους καὶ φαινόμενος τοιοῦτος,
ὁποίους βούλεται τοὺς ἄλλους εἶναι, πιθανώτερος
ἂν εἴη καὶ πρὸς τὸ πράττειν ἀνυσιμώτερος τῶν ἐξ
ἐπιτάγματος [C] ἐπὶ τὰς καλὰς πράξεις παρορμώντων.
</p>

<p>
(But since I seem to have harked back to the life
of contemplation and to be comparing it with the
life of action, though in the beginning of your letter
you declined to make the comparison, I will remind
you of those very philosophers whom you mentioned,
Areius,<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Caesars</hi> 326 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b</hi> note.</note> Nicolaus,<note place='foot'>A historian under Augustus.</note> Thrasyllus,<note place='foot'>The Platonic philosopher and astrologer, cf. Tacitus,
<hi rend='italic'>Annals</hi> 6. 21.</note> and Musonius.<note place='foot'>The Stoic philosopher exiled by Nero.</note> So
far from any one of these governing his own city,
Areius we are told refused the governorship of Egypt
when it was offered to him, and Thrasyllus by becoming
intimate with the harsh and naturally cruel tyrant
Tiberius would have incurred indelible disgrace for
all time, had he not cleared himself in the writings
that he left behind him and so shown his true
character; so little did his public career benefit
him. Nicolaus did not personally do any great deeds,
and he is known rather by his writings about such
deeds; while Musonius became famous because he
bore his sufferings with courage, and, by Zeus,
sustained with firmness the cruelty of tyrants; and
perhaps he was not less happy than those who
administered great kingdoms. As for Areius, when
he declined the governorship of Egypt he deliberately
deprived himself of the highest end, if he really
thought that this was the most important thing.
And you yourself,&mdash;may I ask, do you lead an inactive
life because you are not a general or a public speaker
and govern no nation or city? Nay, no one with
any sense would say so. For it is in your power by
producing many philosophers, or even only three or
four, to confer more benefit on the lives of men than
many kings put together. To no trivial province
the philosopher appointed, and, as you said yourself,
he does not only direct counsels or public affairs, nor
is his activity confined to mere words; but if he confirm
his words by deeds and show himself to be such
as he wishes others to be, he may be more convincing
and more effective in making men act than those
who urge them to noble actions by issuing commands.)
</p>

<p>
Ἀλλ᾽ ἐπανιτέον εἰς ἀρχὴν καὶ συμπεραντέον
τὴν ἐπιστολὴν μείζονα ἴσως οὖσαν τοῦ δέοντος.
ἔστι δὲ ἐν αὐτῇ τὸ κεφάλαιον, ὅτι μήτε τὸν πόνον
φεύγων μήτε τὴν ἡδονὴν θηρεύων μήτε ἀπραγμοσύνης
καὶ ῥᾳστώνης ἐρῶν τὸν ἐν τῇ πολιτείᾳ
δυσχεραίνω βίον· ἀλλ᾽, ὅπερ ἔφην ἐξ ἀρχῆς, οὔτε
παιδείαν ἐμαυτῷ [D] συνειδὼς τοσαύτην οὔτε φύσεως
ὑπεροχήν, καὶ προσέτι δεδιώς, μὴ φιλοσφίαν, ἧς
ἐρῶν οὐκ ἐφικόμην, εἰς τοὺς νῦν ἀνθρώπους οὐδὲ
ἄλλως εὐδοκιμοῦσαν διαβάλλω, πάλαι τε ἔγραφον
ἐκεῖνα καὶ νῦν τὰς παρ᾽ ὑμῶν ἐπιτιμήσεις ἀπελυσάμην
εἰς δύναμιν.
</p>

<p>
(But I must go back to what I said at the beginning,
and conclude this letter, which is perhaps
longer already than it should be. And the main
point in it is that it is not because I would avoid hard
work or pursue pleasure, nor because I am in love
with idleness and ease that I am averse to spending
my life in administration. But, as I said when
I began, it is because I am conscious that I have
neither sufficient training nor natural talents above
the ordinary; moreover, I am afraid of bringing
reproach on philosophy, which, much as I love it, I
have never attained to, and which on other accounts
has no very good reputation among men of our day.
For these reasons I wrote all this down some time
ago, and now I have freed myself from your charges
as far as I can.)
</p>

<p>
Διδοίη δὲ ὁ θεὸς τὴν ἀρίστην τύχην καὶ
φρόνησιν ἀξίαν τῆς τύχης, ὡς ἐγὼ νῦν ἔκ τε
τοῦ κρείττονος τό γε πλέον καὶ παρ᾽ ὑμῶν τῶν
φιλοσοφούντων [267] ἁπάσῃ μηχανῇ<note place='foot'>ἁπάσῃ μηχανῇ follows ὑμῶν in MSS.; Hertlein suggests
present reading.</note> βοηθητέος εἶναί
μοι δοκῶ, προτεταγμένος ὑμῶν καὶ προκινδυνεύων.
εἰ δέ τι μείζον ἀγαθὸν τῆς ἡμετέρας παρασκευῆς
καὶ ἧς ὑπὲρ ἐμαυτοῦ γνώμης ἔχω τοῖς ἀνθρώποις
δι᾽ ἡμῶν ὁ θεὸς παράσχοι, χαλεπαίνειν οὐ χρὴ
πρὸς τοὺς ἐμοὺς λόγους. ἐγὼ γὰρ οὐδὲν ἐμαυτῷ
<pb n='236'/><anchor id='Pg236'/><anchor id='Pg237'/>
συνειδὼς ἀγαθὸν πλὴν τοῦτο μόνον, ὅτι μηδὲ
οἴομαι τὰ μέγιστα ἔχειν ἔχων τε<note place='foot'>τε Hertlein suggests, γε MSS.</note> οὐδέν, ὡς
ὁρᾷς αὐτός, εἰκότως βοῶ καὶ μαρτύρομαι μὴ
μεγάλα παρ᾽ ἡμῶν ἀπαιτεῖν, [B] ἀλλὰ τῷ θεῷ τὸ
πᾶν ἐπιτρέπειν· οὕτω γὰρ ἐγὼ τῶν τε ἐλλειμμάτων
εἴην ἂν ἀνεύθυνος καί, γενομένων ἁπάντων
δεξιῶν, εὐγνώμων ἂν καὶ μέτριος εἴην, οὐκ
ἀλλοτρίοις ἐμαυτὸν ἔργοις ἐπιγράφων, τῷ θεῷ
δέ, ὥσπερ οὖν δίκαιον, προσανατεθεικὼς ἅπαντα
αὐτός τε εἴσομαι καὶ ὑμᾶς προτρέπω τὴν χάριν
εἰδέναι.
</p>

<p>
(May God grant me the happiest fortune possible,
and wisdom to match my fortune! For now I think
I need assistance from God above all, and also from
you philosophers by all means in your power, since I
have proved myself your leader and champion in
danger. But should it be that blessings greater
than of my furnishing and than the opinion that I
now have of myself should be granted to men
by God through my instrumentality, you must not
resent my words. For being conscious or no good
thing in me, save this only, that I do not even think
that I possess the highest talent, and indeed have
naturally none, I cry aloud and testify<note place='foot'>Demosthenes, <hi rend='italic'>De Corona</hi> 23.</note> that you
must not expect great things of me, but must entrust
everything to God. For thus I shall be free from
responsibility for my shortcomings, and if everything
turns out favourably I shall be discreet and moderate,
not putting my name to the deeds of other men,<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Caesars</hi> 323 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b</hi>.</note>
but by giving God the glory for all, as is right, it
is to Him that I shall myself feel gratitude and I
urge all of you to feel the same.)
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='241'/><anchor id='Pg241'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Letter to the Senate and People of Athens</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Introduction</head>

<p>
Of the manifestoes addressed by Julian to Rome,
Sparta, Corinth, and Athens, defending his acceptance
of the title of Emperor and his open rupture with
Constantius, the last alone survives. It was written
in Illyricum in 361, when Julian was on the march
against Constantius, and is the chief authority for
the events that led to his elevation to the Imperial
rank. Julian writes to the Athenians of the fourth
Christian century as though they still possessed the
influence and standards of their forefathers. He
was well known at Athens, where he had studied
before his elevation to the Caesarship and he was
anxious to clear himself in the eyes of the citizens.
For the first time he ventures to speak the truth
about Constantius and to describe the latter's
ruthless treatment of his family. His account of the
revolution at Paris is supplemented by Ammianus
20, Zosimus 3. 9, and the <hi rend='italic'>Epitaph on Julian</hi> by
Libanius.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='242'/><anchor id='Pg242'/><anchor id='Pg243'/>

<div>

<p>
ΙΟΥΛΙΑΝΟΥ ΑΥΤΟΚΡΑΤΟΡΟΣ
</p>

<p>
(Julian, Emperor)
</p>

<p>
ΑΘΗΝΑΙΩΝ ΤΗΙ ΒΟΥΛΗΙ ΚΑΙ ΤΩΙ ΔΗΜΩΙ
</p>

<p>
(To the Senate and
People of Athens.)
</p>

<p>
Πολλῶν εἰργασμένων τοῖς προγόνοις ὑμῶν, ἐφ᾽
οἷς οὐκ ἐκείνοις μόνον τότε ἐξῆν, ἀλλὰ καὶ ὑμῖν
νῦν ἔξεστι φιλοτιμεῖσθαι, καὶ πολλῶν ἐγηγερμένων
τροπαίων ὑπέρ τε ἁπάσης τῆς Ἑλλάδος κοινῇ
καὶ κατ᾽ ἰδίαν ὑπὲρ αὐτῆς τῆς πόλεως, ἐν οἷς
ἠγωνίσατο μόνη πρός τε τοὺς ἄλλους Ἕλληνας
καὶ πρὸς τὸν βάρβαρον, οὐδέν ἐστι τηλικοῦτον
ἔργον οὐδὲ ἀνδραγαθία τοσαύτη, [B] πρὸς ἣν οὐκ
ἔνεστι καὶ ταῖς ἄλλαις ἁμιλληθῆναι πόλεσι.
τὰ μὲν γὰρ μεθ᾽ ὑμῶν καὶ αὗται, τὰ δὲ κατ᾽
ἰδίαν εἰργάσαντο. καὶ ἵνα μὴ μεμνημένος ἔπειτα
ἀντιπαραβάλλων ἢ προτιμᾶν ἑτέρας ἑτέραν ἐν οἷς
διαμφισβητοῦσι νομισθείην ἢ πρὸς τὸ λυσιτελοῦν,
ὥσπερ οἱ ῥήτορες, ἐνδεέστερον ἐπαινεῖν τὰς ἐλαττουμένας,
τοῦτο ἐθέλω [C] φράσαι μόνον ὑπὲρ ὑμῶν, ᾧ
μηδὲν ἀντίπαλον ἔχομεν ἐξευρεῖν παρὰ τοῖς ἄλλοις
Ἕλλησιν, ἐκ τῆς παλαιᾶς φήμης εἰς ἡμᾶς
παραδεδομένον. ἀρχόντων μὲν Λακεδαιμονίων οὐ
βίᾳ τὴν ἀρχήν, ἀλλὰ δόξῃ δικαιοσύνης παρείλεσθε,
<pb n='244'/><anchor id='Pg244'/><anchor id='Pg245'/>
καὶ τὸν Ἀριστείδην τὸν δίκαιον οἱ παρ᾽ ὑμῖν
ἐθρέψαντο νόμοι. καίτοι γε ταῦτα οὕτως ὄντα
λαμπρὰ τεκμήρια [269] διὰ λαμπροτέρων οἶμαι τῶν
ἔργων ὅμως ἐπιστώσασθε. τὸ μὲν γὰρ δόξαι
δίκαιον ἴσως ἂν τῷ καὶ ψευδῶς συμβαίη, καὶ
τυχὸν οὐ παράδοξον ἐν πολλοῖς φαύλοις ἕνα
γενέσθαι σπουδαῖον. ἢ γὰρ οὐχὶ καὶ παρὰ
Μήδοις ὑμνεῖταί τις Δηιόκης Ἄβαρίς τε ἐν
Ὑπερβορέοις καὶ Ἀνάχαρσις ἐν Σκύθαις; ὑπὲρ
ὧν τοῦτο ἦν θαυμαστόν, ὅτι παρὰ τοῖς ἀδικωτάτοις
γεγονότες ἔθνεσι τὴν δίκην ὅμως ἐτίμησαν,
τὼ μὲν ἀληθῶς, [B] ὁ δὲ τῆς χρείας χάριν πλαττόμενος.
δῆμον δὲ ὅλον καὶ πόλιν ἐραστὰς ἔργων
καὶ λόγων δικαίων ἔξω τῆς παρ᾽ ὑμῖν οὐ ῥᾴδιον
εὑρεῖν. βούλομαι δὲ ὑμᾶς ἑνὸς τῶν παρ᾽ ὑμῖν
πολλῶν γε ὄντων ἔργων ὑπομνῆσαι. Θεμιστοκλέους
γὰρ μετὰ τὰ Μηδικὰ γνώμην εἰσηγεῖσθαι
διανοουμένου λάθρᾳ καταφλέξαι τὰ νεώρια τῶν
Ἑλλήνων, [C] εἶτα μὴ τολμῶντος εἰς τὸν δῆμον
λέγειν, ἑνὶ δὲ ὁμολογοῦντος πιστεύσειν τὸ ἀπόρρητον,
ὅνπερ ἂν ὁ δῆμος χειροτονήσας προέληται,
προυβάλετο μὲν ὁ δῆμος τὸν Ἀριστείδην· ὁ δὲ
ἀκούσας τῆς γνώμης ἔκρυψε μὲν τὸ ῥηθέν,
ἐξήνεγκε δὲ εἰς τὸν δῆμον, ὡς οὔτε λυσιτελέστερον
οὔτε ἀδικώτερον εἴη τι τοῦ βουλεύματος· καὶ
<pb n='246'/><anchor id='Pg246'/><anchor id='Pg247'/>
ἡ πόλις ἀπεψηφίσατο παραχρῆμα καὶ παρῃτήσατο,
πάνυ γε νὴ Δία μεγαλοψύχως καὶ ὃν
ἐχρῆν τρόπον ἄνδρας [D] ὑπὸ μάρτυρι τῇ φρονιμωτάτῃ
θεῷ τρεφομένους.
</p>

<p>
(Many were the achievements of your forefathers
of which you are still justly proud, even as they
were of old; many were the trophies for victories
raised by them, now for all Greece in common,
now separately for Athens herself, in those days
when she contended single-handed against all the
rest of Greece as well as against the barbarian:
but there was no achievement and no display of
courage on your part so prodigious that other
cities cannot in their turn rival it. For they too
wrought some such deeds in alliance with you, and
some on their own account. And that I may not by
recalling these and then balancing them be thought
either to pay more honour to one state than to another
in the matters in which they are your rivals, or
to praise less than they deserve those who proved
inferior, in order to gain an advantage, after the
manner of rhetoricians, I desire to bring forward on
your behalf only this fact to which I can discover nothing
that can be set against it on the part of the other
Greek states, and which has been assigned to you by
ancient tradition. When the Lacedaemonians were
in power you took that power away from them not
by violence but by your reputation for justice; and
it was your laws that nurtured Aristides the Just.
Moreover, brilliant as were these proofs of your
virtue, you confirmed them by still more brilliant
actions. For to be reputed just might perhaps
happen to any individual even though it were not
true; perhaps it would not be surprising that
among many worthless citizens there should be found
one virtuous man. For even among the Medes
is not a certain Deioces<note place='foot'>The first King of Media; reigned 709-656 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi></note> celebrated, and Abaris<note place='foot'>A priest of Apollo whose story and date are uncertain.</note>
too among the Hyperboreans, and Anacharsis<note place='foot'>A Scythian prince who visited Athens at the end of the
sixth century <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi>; cf. Cicero, <hi rend='italic'>Tusculan Disputations</hi> 5. 32;
Lucian, <hi rend='italic'>Anacharsis</hi>.</note> among
the Scythians? And in their case the surprising
thing was that, born as they were among nations
who knew nothing of justice, they nevertheless
prized justice, two of them sincerely, though the
third only pretended to do so out of self-interest.
But it would be hard to find a whole people and
city enamoured of just deeds and just words except
your own. And I wish to remind you of one out
of very many such deeds done in your city. After
the Persian war Themistocles<note place='foot'>The story is told in Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Themistocles</hi>.</note> was planning to
introduce a resolution to set fire secretly to the
naval arsenals of the Greeks, and then did not dare
to propose it to the assembly; but he agreed to
confide the secret to any one man whom the people
should elect by vote; and the people chose Aristides
to represent them. But he when he heard the
scheme did not reveal what he had been told, but
reported to the people that there could be nothing
more profitable or more dishonest than that advice.
Whereupon the city at once voted against it and
rejected it, very nobly, by Zeus, and as it behoved
men to do who are nurtured under the eyes of the
most wise goddess.<note place='foot'>Athene.</note>)
</p>

<p>
Οὐκοῦν εἰ ταῦτα παρ᾽ ὑμῖν μὲν ἦν πάλαι,
σώζεται δὲ ἐξ ἐκείνου καὶ εἰς ὑμᾶς ἔτι τῆς τῶν
προγόνων ἀρετῆς ὥσπερ ἐμπύρευμά τι σμικρόν,
εἰκός ἐστιν ὑμᾶς οὐκ εἰς τὸ μέγεθος τῶν πραττομένων
ἀφορᾶν οὐδὲ εἴ τις ὥσπερ δι᾽ ἀέρος ἱπτάμενος
διὰ τῆς γῆς ἐβάδισεν ἀμηχάνῳ τάχει
καὶ ἀτρύτῳ ῥώμῃ, σκοπεῖν δὲ ὅτῳ ταῦτα μετὰ
τοῦ δικαίου κατείργασται, [270] κᾆτα ἂν μὲν φαίνηται
ξὺν δίκῃ πράττων, ἰδίᾳ τε αὐτὸν ἴσως καὶ
δημοσίᾳ πάντες ἐπαινεῖτε, τῆς δίκης δὲ ὀλιγωρήσας
ἀτιμάζοιτο ἂν παρ᾽ ὑμῶν εἰκότως. οὐδὲν
γὰρ οὕτως ἐστὶν ὡς τὸ δίκαιον ἀδελφὸν φρονήσει.
τοὺς οὖν ἀτιμάζοντας τοῦτο δικαίως ἂν καὶ
ὡς εἰς τὴν παρ᾽ ὑμῖν θεὸν ἀσεβοῦντας ἐξελαύνοιτε.
βούλομαι οὖν ὑμῖν τὰ κατ᾽ ἐμαυτὸν οὐκ ἀγνοοῦσι
μὲν ἀπαγγεῖλαι δὲ ὅμως, [B] ὅπως, εἴ τι λέληθεν· εἰκὸς
δὲ ἔνια καὶ ὅσα μάλιστα τοῖς πᾶσι γνωσθῆναι
προσήκει· ὑμῖν τε καὶ δι᾽ ὑμῶν τοῖς ἄλλοις
Ἕλλησι γένοιτο γνώριμα. μηδεὶς οὖν ὑπολάβῃ
με ληρεῖν ἢ φλυαρεῖν, εἰ περὶ τῶν πᾶσιν ὥσπερ
ἐν ὀφθαλμοῖς γεγονότων οὐ πάλαι μόνον, ἀλλὰ
καὶ μικρῷ πρότερον, ποιεῖσθαί τινας ἐπιχειρήσαιμι
λόγους· οὐδένα γὰρ οὐδὲν ἀγνοεῖν βούλομαι
τῶν ἐμαυτοῦ, λανθάνειν δὲ ἄλλον ἄλλα εἰκός·
<pb n='248'/><anchor id='Pg248'/><anchor id='Pg249'/>
[C] ἄρξομαι δὲ ἀπὸ τῶν προγόνων πρῶτον τῶν
ἐμαυτοῦ.
</p>

<p>
(Then if this was your conduct of old, and from
that day to this there is kept alive some small
spark as it were of the virtue of your ancestors,
it is natural that you should pay attention not to
the magnitude merely of any performance, nor
whether a man has travelled over the earth with
incredible speed and unwearied energy as though he
had flown through the air; but that you should rather
consider whether one has accomplished this feat
by just means, and then if he seems to act with
justice, you will perhaps all praise him both in public
and private; but if he have slighted justice he will
naturally be scorned by you. For there is nothing
so closely akin to wisdom as justice. Therefore
those who slight her you will justly expel as showing
impiety towards the goddess who dwells among you.
For this reason I wish to report my conduct to
you, though indeed you know it well, in order that
if there is anything you do not know&mdash;and it is
likely that some things you do not, and those
in fact which it is most important for all men to
be aware of&mdash;it may become known to you and
through you to the rest of the Greeks. Therefore
let no one think that I am trifling and wasting
words if I try to give some account of things that
have happened as it were before the eyes of all
men, not only long ago but also just lately. For
I wish none to be ignorant of anything that
concerns me, and naturally everyone cannot know
every circumstance. First I will begin with my
ancestors.)
</p>

<p>
Καὶ ὅτι μὲν τὰ πρὸς πατρὸς ἡμῖν ἐντεῦθεν
ὅθενπερ καὶ Κωνσταντίῳ τὰ πρὸς πατρὸς ὥρμηται,
φανερόν. τὼ γὰρ ἡμετέρω πατέρε γεγόνατον
ἀδελφὼ πατρόθεν. οὕτω δὲ πλησίον ἡμᾶς ὄντας
συγγενεῖς ὁ φιλανθρωπότατος οὗτος βασιλεὺς
οἷα εἰργάσατο, ἓξ μὲν ἀνεψιοὺς ἐμοῦ τε καὶ
ἑαυτοῦ, πατέρα δὲ τὸν ἐμόν,<note place='foot'>τὸν ἐμὸν Hertlein suggests, ἐμὸν MSS.</note> ἑαυτοῦ δὲ θεῖον,
[D] καὶ προσέτι κοινὸν ἕτερον τὸν πρὸς πατρὸς
θεῖον ἀδελφόν τε ἐμὸν τὸν πρεσβύτατον ἀκρίτους
κτεῖνας, ἐμὲ δὲ καὶ ἕτερον ἀδελφὸν ἐμὸν ἐθελήσας
μὲν κτεῖναι, τέλος δὲ ἐπιβαλὼν φυγήν, ἀφ᾽ ἧς
ἐμὲ μὲν ἀφῆκεν, ἐκεῖνον δὲ ὀλίγῳ πρότερον τῆς
σφαγῆς ἐξέδυσε<note place='foot'>ἐξέδυσε Hertlein suggests, ἐρρύσατο οὐδὲ Cobet, ἐρρύσατο MSS.</note> τὸ τοῦ Καίσαρος ὄνομα, τί
με δεῖ νῦν ὥσπερ ἐκ τραγῳδίας τὰ ἄρρητα
ἀναμετρεῖσθαι; μετεμέλησε γὰρ αὐτῷ, φασί,
καὶ ἐδήχθη δεινῶς, [271] ἀπαιδίαν τε ἐντεῦθεν νομίζει
δυστυχεῖν, τά τε ἐς τοὺς πολεμίους τοὺς Πέρσας
οὐκ εὐτυχῶς πράττειν ἐκ τούτων ὑπολαμβάνει.
ταῦτα ἐθρύλουν οἱ περὶ τὴν αὐλὴν τότε καὶ
τὸν μακαρίτην ἀδελφὸν ἐμὸν Γάλλον, τοῦτο
νῦν πρῶτον ἀκούοντα τὸ ὄνομα· κτείνας γὰρ
αὐτὸν παρὰ τοὺς νόμους οὐδὲ τῶν πατρῴων
μεταλαχεῖν εἴασε τάφων οὐδὲ τῆς εὐαγοῦς ἠξίωσε
μνήμης.
</p>

<p>
(That on the father's side I am descended from the
same stock as Constantius on his father's side is
well known. Our fathers were brothers, sons of
the same father. And close kinsmen as we were,
how this most humane Emperor treated us! Six
of my cousins and his, and my father who was his
own uncle and also another uncle of both of us on the
father's side, and my eldest brother, he put to death
without a trial; and as for me and my other brother,<note place='foot'>Gallus.</note>
he intended to put us to death but finally inflicted
exile upon us; and from that exile he released
me, but him he stripped of the title of Caesar just
before he murdered him. But why should I <q>recount,</q>
as though from some tragedy, <q>all these unspeakable
horrors?</q><note place='foot'>Euripides, <hi rend='italic'>Orestes</hi> 14, τί τἄρρητ᾽ ἀναμετρήσασθαί με δεῖ;</note> For he has repented, I am told, and
is stung by remorse; and he thinks that his unhappy
state of childlessness is due to those deeds, and
his ill success in the Persian war he also ascribes to
that cause. This at least was the gossip of the
court at the time and of those who were about
the person of my brother Gallus of blessed memory,
who is now for the first time so styled. For after
putting him to death in defiance of the laws he
neither suffered him to share the tombs of his
ancestors nor granted him a pious memory.)
</p>

<p>
Ὅπερ οὖν ἔφην, [B] ἔλεγον τοσαῦτα καὶ δὴ καὶ
ἔπειθον ἡμᾶς,<note place='foot'>ἡμᾶς Hertlein, Reiske suggest, ὑμᾶς MSS.</note> ὅτι τὰ μὲν ἀπατηθεὶς εἰργάσατο,
τὰ δὲ βίᾳ καὶ ταραχαῖς εἴξας ἀτάκτου καὶ
<pb n='250'/><anchor id='Pg250'/><anchor id='Pg251'/>
ταραχώδους στρατεύματος. τοσαῦτα ἡμῖν ἐπῇδον
ἐν ἀγρῷ τινι τῶν ἐν Καππαδοκίᾳ κατακεκλεισμένοις,
οὐδένα ἐῶντες προσελθεῖν, τὸν μὲν ἀπὸ
τῆς ἐν Τράλλεσι<note place='foot'>ἀπὸ τῆς ἐν Τράλλεσι φυγῆς Hertlein suggests, ἁπὸ τραλφυγῆς
V, ἀπο τρα φυγῆς Petavius.</note> φυγῆς ἀνακαλεσάμενοι, ἐμὲ
δὲ κομιδῇ μειράκιον ἔτι τῶν διδασκαλείων ἀπαγαγόντες.
πῶς [C] ἂν ἐνταῦθα φράσαιμι περὶ τῶν
ἓξ ἐνιαυτῶν, οὓς ἐν ἀλλοτρίῳ κτήματι διάγοντες,<note place='foot'>διάγοντε Hertlein suggests, διαγαγόντες MSS.</note>
ὥσπερ οἱ παρὰ τοῖς Πέρσαις ἐν τοῖς φρουρίοις
τηρούμενοι, μηδενὸς ἡμῖν προσιόντος ξένου μηδὲ
τῶν πάλαι γνωρίμων ἐπιτρεπομένου τινὸς ὡς
ἡμᾶς φοιτᾶν, διεζῶμεν ἀποκεκλεισμένοι παντὸς
μὲν μαθήματος σπουδαίου, πάσης δὲ ἐλευθέρας
ἐντεύξεως, ἐν ταῖς λαμπραῖς οἰκετείαις τρεφόμενοι
[D] καὶ τοῖς ἡμῶν αὐτῶν δούλοις ὥσπερ ἑταίροις
συγγυμναζόμενοι; προσῄει γὰρ οὐδεὶς οὐδὲ ἐπετρέπετο
τῶν ἡλικιωτῶν.
</p>

<p>
(As I said, they kept telling us and tried to
convince us that Constantius had acted thus, partly
because he was deceived, and partly because he
yielded to the violence and tumult of an undisciplined
and mutinous army. This was the strain
they kept up to soothe us when we had been
imprisoned in a certain farm<note place='foot'>The castle of Macellum.</note> in Cappadocia; and
they allowed no one to come near us after they had
summoned him from exile in Tralles and had dragged
me from the schools, though I was still a mere boy.
How shall I describe the six years we spent there?
For we lived as though on the estate of a stranger,
and were watched as though we were in some
Persian garrison, since no stranger came to see
us and not one of our old friends was allowed to
visit us; so that we lived shut off from every liberal
study and from all free intercourse, in a glittering
servitude, and sharing the exercises of our own slaves
though they were comrades. For no companion
of our own age ever came near us or was allowed to
do so.)
</p>

<p>
Ἐντεῦθεν ἐγὼ μὲν μόγις ἀφείθην διὰ τοὺς
θεοὺς εὐτυχῶς, ὁ δὲ ἀδελφὸς ὁ ἐμὸς εἰς τὴν αὐλὴν
καθείρχθη δυστυχῶς, εἴπερ τις ἄλλος τῶν πώποτε.
καὶ γὰρ εἴ τι περὶ τὸν τρόπον ἄγριον καὶ
τραχὺ τὸν ἐκείνου κατεφάνη, τοῦτο ἐκ τῆς
ὀρείου τροφῆς συνηυξήθη. δίκαιος οὖν οἶμαι
καὶ ταύτην ἔχειν τὴν αἰτίαν ὁ ταύτης ἡμῖν
πρὸς βίαν μεταδοὺς τῆς τροφῆς, ἧς ἐμὲ μὲν
οἱ θεοὶ διὰ [272] τῆς φιλοσοφίας καθαρὸν ἀπέφηναν
καὶ ἐξάντη, τῷ δὲ οὐδεὶς ἐνέδωκεν. εὐθὺς γὰρ
ἀπὸ τῶν ἀγρῶν ἐς τὰ βασίλεια παρελθόντι
<pb n='252'/><anchor id='Pg252'/><anchor id='Pg253'/>
ἐπειδὴ πρῶτον αὐτῷ περιέθηκεν ἁλουργὲς ἱμάτιον,
αὐτίκα φθονεῖν ἀρξάμενος οὐ πρότερον ἐπαύσατο
πρὶν καθελεῖν αὐτόν, οὐδὲ τῷ περιελεῖν τὸ
πορφυροῦν ἱμάτιον ἀρκεσθείς. καίτοι τοῦ ζῆν
γοῦν ἄξιος, εἰ μὴ βασιλεύειν ἐφαίνετο ἐπιτήδειος.
ἀλλ᾽ ἐχρῆν αὐτὸν καὶ τούτου στέρεσθαι. ξυγχωρῶ,
[B] λόγον γε πάντως ὑποσχόντα πρότερον,
ὥσπερ τοὺς κακούργους. οὐ γὰρ δὴ τοὺς μὲν
λῃστὰς ὁ νόμος ἀπαγορεύει τῷ δήσαντι κτείνειν,
τοὺς ἁφαιρεθέντας δὲ τιμάς, ἃς εἶχον, καὶ γενομένους
ἐξ ἀρχόντων ἰδιώτας ἀκρίτους φησὶ δεῖν
ἀναιρεῖσθαι. τί γάρ, εἰ τῶν ἁμαρτημάτων εἶχεν
ἀποφῆναι [C] τοῦς αἰτίους; ἐδέδοντο γὰρ αὐτῷ
τινων ἐπιστολαί, Ἡράκλεις, ὅσας ἔχουσαι κατ᾽
αὐτοῦ κατηγορίας, ἐφ᾽ αἷς ἐκεῖνος ἀγανακτῆσας
ἀκρατέστερον μὲν καὶ ἥκιστα βασιλικῶς ἐφῆκε
τῷ θυμῷ, τοῦ μέντοι μηδὲ ζῆν ἄξιον οὐδὲν ἐπεπράχει.
πῶς γάρ; οὐχ οὗτός ἐστιν ἀνθρώποις ἅπασι
κοινὸς Ἕλλησιν ἅμα καὶ βαρβάροις ὁ νόμος,
ἀμύνεσθαι τοὺς ἀδικίας ὑπάρχοντας; ἀλλ᾽ ἴσως
μὲν ἠμύνατο πικρότερον. οὐ μὴν ἔξω πάντη
τοῦ εἰκότος· τὸν γὰρ ἐχθρὸν ὑπ᾽ ὀργῆς εἰκός
τι καὶ ποιεῖν, [D] εἴρηται καὶ πρόσθεν. ἀλλ᾽ εἰς
χάριν ἑνὸς ἀνδρογύνου, τοῦ κατακοιμιστοῦ, καὶ
προσέτι τοῦ τῶν μαγείρων ἐπιτρόπου τὸν ἀνεψιόν,
τὸν καίσαρα, τὸν τῆς ἀδελφῆς ἄνδρα γενόμενον,
<pb n='254'/><anchor id='Pg254'/><anchor id='Pg255'/>
τὸν τῆς ἀδελφιδῆς πατέρα, οὗ καὶ αὐτὸς πρότερον
ἦν ἀγαγόμενος τὴν ἀδελφήν, πρὸς ὃν αὐτῷ
τοσαῦτα θεῶν ὁμογνίων ὑπῆρχε δίκαια, κτεῖναι
παρέδωκε τοῖς ἐχθίστοις· ἐμὲ δὲ ἀφῆκε μόγις
ἑπτὰ μηνῶν ὅλων ἑλκύσας τῇδε κἀκεῖσε καὶ
ποιησάμενος ἔμφρουρον, [273] ὥστε, εἰ μὴ θεῶν τις
ἐθελήσας με σωθῆναι τὴν καλὴν καὶ ἀγαθὴν
τὸ τηνικαῦτά μοι παρέσχεν εὐμενῆ Εὐσεβίαν,
οὐδ᾽ ἂν ἐγὼ τὰς χεῖρας αὐτοῦ τότε διέφυγον.
καίτοι μὰ τοὺς θεοὺς οὐδ᾽ ὄναρ μοι φανεὶς ἀδελφὸς
ἐπεπράχει· καὶ γὰρ οὐδὲ συνῆν αὐτῷ οὐδὲ
ἐφοίτων οὐδὲ ἐβάδιζον παρ᾽ αὐτὸν, ὀλιγάκις δὲ
ἔγραφον καὶ ὑπὲρ ὀλίγων. [B] ὡς οὖν ἀποφυγὼν
ἐκεῖθεν ἄσμενος ἐπορευόμην ἐπὶ τὴν τῆς μητρὸς
ἑστίαν· πατρῷον γὰρ οὐδὲν ὑπῆρχέ μοι οὐδὲ
ἐκεκτήμην ἐκ τοσούτων, ὅσων εἰκὸς ἦν πατέρα
κεκτῆσθαι τὸν ἐμόν, οὐκ ἐλαχίστην βῶλον, οὐκ ἀνδράποδον,
οὐκ οἰκίαν· ὁ γάρ τοι καλὸς Κωνστάντιος
ἐκληρονόμησεν ἀντ᾽ ἐμοῦ τὴν πατρῴαν οὐσίαν
ἅπασαν, ἐμοί τε, ὅπερ ἔφην, οὐδὲ γρὺ μετέδωκεν
αὐτῆς· ἀλλὰ καὶ τῷ ἀδελφῷ τομῷ τῶν πατρῴων
ἔδωκεν ὀλίγα, πάντων αὐτὸν ἀφελόμενος τῶν
μητρῴων.
</p>

<p>
(From that place barely and by the help of
the gods I was set free, and for a happier fate; but
my brother was imprisoned at court and his fate was
ill-starred above all men who have ever yet lived.
And indeed whatever cruelty or harshness was revealed
in his disposition was increased by his having
been brought up among those mountains. It is
therefore I think only just that the Emperor should
bear the blame for this also, he who against our will
allotted to us that sort of bringing-up. As for me,
the gods by means of philosophy caused me to
remain untouched by it and unharmed; but on my
brother no one bestowed this boon. For when he
had come straight from the country to the court,
the moment that Constantius had invested him with
the purple robe he at once began to be jealous of
him, nor did he cease from that feeling until, not
content with stripping him of the purple, he had
destroyed him. Yet surely he deserved to live, even
if he seemed unfit to govern. But someone may say
that it was necessary to deprive him of life also. I
admit it, only on condition that he had first been
allowed to speak in his own defence as criminals are.
For surely it is not the case that the law forbids one
who has imprisoned bandits to put them to death,
but says that it is right to destroy without a trial
those who have been stripped of the honours that
they possessed and have become mere individuals
instead of rulers. For what if my brother had
been able to expose those who were responsible
for his errors? For there had been handed to him
the letters of certain persons, and, by Heracles,
what accusations against himself they contained!
And in his resentment at these he gave way in
most unkingly fashion to uncontrolled anger, but
he had done nothing to deserve being deprived
of life itself. What! Is not this a universal law
among all Greeks and barbarians alike, that one
should defend oneself against those who take the
initiative in doing one a wrong? I admit that he did
perhaps defend himself with too great cruelty; but
on the whole not more cruelly than might have been
expected. For we have heard it said before<note place='foot'>Cf. Demosthenes, <hi rend='italic'>Against Meidias</hi> 41.</note> that an
enemy may be expected to harm one in a fit of anger.
But it was to gratify a eunuch,<note place='foot'>Eusebius; cf. Ammianus Marcellinus 14. 11; 22. 3.</note> his chamberlain
who was also his chief cook, that Constantius gave
over to his most inveterate enemies his own cousin,
the Caesar, his sister's husband, the father of his
niece, the man whose own sister he had himself
married in earlier days,<note place='foot'>The sister of Gallus was the first wife of Constantius.</note> and to whom he owed so
many obligations connected with the gods of the
family. As for me he reluctantly let me go, after
dragging me hither and thither for seven whole
months and keeping me under guard; so that
had not some one of the gods desired that I should
escape, and made the beautiful and virtuous Eusebia
kindly disposed to me, I could not then have escaped
from his hands myself. And yet I call the
gods to witness that my brother had pursued his
course of action without my having a sight of
him even in a dream. For I was not with him, nor
did I visit him or travel to his neighbourhood; and I
used to write to him very seldom and on unimportant
matters. Thinking therefore that I had
escaped from that place, I set out for the house that
had been my mother's. For of my father's estate
nothing belonged to me, and I had acquired out
of the great wealth that had naturally belonged to
my father not the smallest clod of earth, not a slave,
not a house. For the admirable Constantius had inherited
in my place the whole of my father's
property, and to me, as I was saying, he granted not
the least trifle of it; moreover, though he gave my
brother a few things that had been his father's, he
robbed him of the whole of his mother's estate.)
</p>

<p>
[C] Ὅσα μὲν οὖν ἔπραξε πρός με πρὶν ὀνόματος
μὲν μεταδοῦναί μοι τοῦ σεμνοτάτου, ἔργῳ δὲ
εἰς πικροτάτην καὶ χαλεπωτάτην ἐμβαλεῖν δουλείαν,
εἰ καὶ μὴ πάντα, τὰ πλεῖστα γοῦν ὅμως
<pb n='256'/><anchor id='Pg256'/><anchor id='Pg257'/>
ἀκηκόατε<note place='foot'>ἀκηκόατε Cobet, ἠκούσατ</note> πορευομένου δὴ<note place='foot'>δὴ Hertlein suggests, δὲ MSS.</note> λοιπὸν ἐπὶ τὴν ἑστίαν,
ἀγαπητῶς τε καὶ μόγις ἀποσωζομένου, συκοφάντης
τις ἀνεφάνη περὶ τὸ Σίρμιον, ὃς τοῖς ἐκεῖ πράγματα
ἕρραψεν ὡς νεώτερα διανοουμένοις· [D] ἴστε
δήπουθεν ἀκοῇ τὸν Ἀφρικανὸν καὶ τὸν Μαρῖνον·
οὔκουν ὑμᾶς οὐδὲ ὁ Φῆλιξ ἔλαθεν οὐδὲ ὅσα
ἐπράχθη περὶ τοὺς ἀνθρώπους. ἀλλ᾽ ὡς τοῦτο
αὐτῷ κατεμηνύθη τὸ πρᾶγμα, καὶ Δυνάμιος ἐξαίφνης,
ἄλλος συκοφάντης, ἐκ Κελτῶν ἤγγειλεν
ὅσον οὔπω τὸν Σιλουανὸν αὐτῷ πολέμιον ἀναφανεῖσθαι,
δείσας παντάπασι καὶ φοβηθεὶς αὐτίκα
ἐπ᾽ ἐμὲ πέμπει, καὶ μικρὸν εἰς τὴν Ἑλλάδα κελεύσας
ὑποχωρῆσαι [274] πάλιν ἐκεῖθεν ἀκάλει παρ᾽ ἑαυτόν,
οὔπω πρότερον τεθεαμένος πλὴν ἅπαξ μὲν ἐν
Καππαδοκίᾳ, ἅπαξ δὲ ἐν Ἰταλίᾳ, ἀγωνισαμένης
Εὐσεβίας, ὡς ἂν ὑπὲρ τῆς σωτηρίας τῆς ἐμαυτοῦ
θαρρήσαιμι. καίτοι τὴν αὐτὴν αὐτῷ πόλιν
ἓξ ᾤκησα μηνῶν, καὶ μέντοι καὶ ὑπέσχετό με
θεάσεσθαι πάλιν. ἀλλ᾽ ὁ θεοῖς ἐχθρὸς ἀνδρόγυνος,
ὁ πιστὸς αὐτοῦ κατακοιμιστής, ἔλαθέ μου
καὶ ἄκων εὐεργέτης γενόμενος· οὐ γὰρ εἴασεν
ἐντυχεῖν με πολλάκις αὐτῷ, [B] τυχὸν μὲν οὐδὲ
ἐθέλοντι, πλὴν ἀλλὰ τὸ κεφάλαιον ἐκεῖνος ἦν·
ὤκνει γὰρ ὡς ἂν μή τινος συνηθείας ἐγγενομένης
ἡμῖν πρὸς ἀλλήλους ἔπειτα ἀγαπηθείην καὶ πιστὸς
ἀναφανεὶς ἐπιτραπείην τι.
</p>

<p>
(Now his whole behaviour to me before he granted
me that august title<note place='foot'>The title of Caesar.</note>&mdash;though in fact what he did
was to impose on me the most galling and irksome
slavery&mdash;you have heard, if not every detail, still the
greater part. As I was saying, I was on my way to
my home and was barely getting away safely, beyond
my hopes, when a certain sycophant<note place='foot'>Gaudentius.</note> turned up near
Sirmium<note place='foot'>A town in Illyricum.</note> and fabricated the rumour against certain
persons there that they were planning a revolt. You
certainly know by hearsay Africanus<note place='foot'>For the account of this alleged conspiracy cf. Ammianus
Marcellinus 15. 3.</note> and Marinus:
nor can you fail to have heard of Felix and what was
the fate of those men. And when Constantius was
informed of the matter, and Dynamius another
sycophant suddenly reported from Gaul that
Silvanus<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Oration</hi> 1. 48 <hi rend='smallcaps'>c</hi>; 2. 98 <hi rend='smallcaps'>c</hi>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>d</hi>.</note> was on the point of declaring himself his
open enemy, in the utmost alarm and terror he forthwith
sent to me, and first he bade me retire for
a short time to Greece, then summoned me from
there to the court<note place='foot'>At Milan.</note> again. He had never seen me
before except once in Cappadocia and once in Italy,&mdash;an
interview which Eusebia had secured by her
exertions so that I might feel confidence about
my personal safety. And yet I lived for six months
in the same city<note place='foot'>Milan.</note> as he did, and he had promised that
he would see me again. But that execrable eunuch,<note place='foot'>Eusebius.</note>
his trusty chamberlain, unconsciously and involuntarily
proved himself my benefactor. For he did not
allow me to meet the Emperor often, nor perhaps
did the latter desire it; still the eunuch was
the chief reason. For what he dreaded was that if
we had any intercourse with one another I might be
taken into favour, and when my loyalty became
evident I might be given some place of trust.)
</p>

<p>
Παραγενόμενον δή με τότε πρῶτον ἀπὸ τῆς
Ἑλλάδος αὐτίκα διὰ τῶν περὶ τὴν θεραπείαν
<pb n='258'/><anchor id='Pg258'/><anchor id='Pg259'/>
εὐνούχων ἡ μακαρῖτις Εὐσεβία καὶ λίαν ἐφιλοφρονεῖτο.
μικρὸν δὲ ὕστερον ἐπελθόντος τούτου·
[C] καὶ γάρ τοι καὶ τὰ περὶ Σιλουανὸν ἐπέπρακτο·
λοιπὸν εἴσοδός τε εἰς τὴν αὐλὴν δίδοται, καὶ τὸ
λεγόμενον ἡ Θετταλικὴ περιβάλλεται πειθανάγκη.
ἀρνουμένου γάρ μου τὴν συνουσίαν στερεῶς ἐν
τοῖς βασιλείοις, οἱ μὲν ὥσπερ ἐν κουρείῳ συνελθόντες
ἀποκείρουσι τὸν πώγωνα, χλανίδα δὲ
ἀμφιεννύουσι καὶ σχηματώζουσιν, ὡς τότε ὑπελάμβανον,
πάνυ γελοῖον στρατιώτην· [D] οὐδὲν γάρ μοι
τοῦ καλλωπισμοῦ τῶν καθαρμάτων ἥρμοζεν·
ἐβάδιζον δὲ οὐχ ὥσπερ ἐκεῖνοι περιβλέπων καὶ
σοβῶν<note place='foot'>περιβλέπων ... σοβῶν Hertlein suggests, περιβλέποντες ...
σοβοῦντες MSS.</note> ἀλλ᾽ εἰς γῆν βλέπων, ὥσπερ εἰθίσμην
ὑπὸ τοῦ θρέψαντός με παιδαγωγοῦ. τότε μὲν οὖν
αὐτοῖς παρέσχον γέλωτα, μικρὸν δὲ ὕστερον ὑποψίαν,
εἶτα ἀνέλαμψεν ὁ τοσοῦτος φθόνος.
</p>

<p>
(Now from the first moment of my arrival from
Greece, Eusebia of blessed memory kept showing me
the utmost kindness through the eunuchs of her
household. And a little later when the Emperor
returned&mdash;for the affair of Silvanus had been concluded&mdash;at
last I was given access to the court, and,
in the words of the proverb, Thessalian persuasion<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Oration</hi> 1. 32 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a</hi>. The origin of the proverb is obscure;
cf. Cicero, <hi rend='italic'>Letter to Atticus</hi> 9. 13.</note>
was applied to me. For when I firmly declined
all intercourse with the palace, some of them, as
though they had come together in a barber's shop, cut
off my beard and dressed me in a military cloak and
transformed me into a highly ridiculous soldier, as
they thought at the time. For none of the decorations
of those villains suited me. And I walked not
like them, staring about me and strutting along, but
gazing on the ground as I had been trained to do
by the preceptor<note place='foot'>Mardonius.</note> who brought me up. At the
time then, I inspired their ridicule, but a little later
their suspicion, and then their jealousy was inflamed
to the utmost.)
</p>

<p>
Ἀλλ᾽ ἐνταῦθα χρὴ μὴ παραλείπειν ἐκεῖνα, πῶς
ἐγὼ συνεχώρησα, πῶς ἐδεχόμην<note place='foot'>ἐδεχόμην Naber, δὲ εἱλόμην Hertlein, MSS.</note> ὁμωρόφιος<note place='foot'>ὁμωρόφιος Cobet, ὁμορόφιος Hertlein, MSS.</note>
ἐκείνοις γενέσθαι, οὓς ἠπιστάμην παντὶ μέν μου
λυμηναμένους τῷ γένει, [275] ὑπώπτευον δὲ οὐκ εἰς
μακρὰν ἐπιβουλεύσοντας καὶ ἐμοὶ. πηγὰς μὲν
οὖν ὁπόσας ἀφῆκα δακρύων καὶ θρήνους οἵους,
ἀνατείνων εἰς τὴν ἀκρόπολιν τὴν παρ᾽ ὑμῖν τὰς
χεῖρας, ὅτε ἐκαλούμην, καὶ τὴν Ἀθηνᾶν ἱκετεύων
σώζειν τὸν ἱκέτην καὶ μὴ ἐκδιδόναι, πολλοὶ
τῶν παρ᾽ ὑμῖν ἑορακότες εἰσί μοι μάρτυρες, αὐτὴ
δὲ ἡ θεὸς πρὸ τῶν ἄλλων, ὅτι καὶ θάνατον
ᾐτησάμην παρ᾽ [B] αὐτῆς Ἀθήνησι πρὸ τῆς τότε
<pb n='260'/><anchor id='Pg260'/><anchor id='Pg261'/>
ὁδοῦ. ὡς μὲν οὖν οὐ προύδωκεν ἡ θεὸς τὸν
ἱκέτην οὐδὲ ἐξέδωκεν, ἔργοις ἔδείξεν·<note place='foot'>ἔδειξεν Hertlein suggests, ἐπέδειξεν MSS.</note> ἡγήσατο
γὰρ ἁπανταχοῦ μοι καὶ παρέστησεν ἁπανταχόθεν
τοὺς φύλακας, ἐξ Ἡλίου καὶ Σελήνης ἀγγέλους
λαβοῦσα.
</p>

<p>
(But this I must not omit to tell here, how I
submitted and how I consented to dwell under the
same roof with those whom I knew to have ruined
my whole family, and who, I suspected, would before
long plot against myself also. But what floods of
tears I shed and what laments I uttered when I was
summoned, stretching out my hands to your Acropolis
and imploring Athene to save her suppliant
and not to abandon me, many of you who were
eyewitnesses can attest, and the goddess herself,
above all others, is my witness that I even begged
for death at her hands there in Athens rather than
my journey to the Emperor. That the goddess
accordingly did not betray her suppliant or abandon
him she proved by the event. For everywhere she
was my guide, and on all sides she set a watch near
me, bringing guardian angels from Helios and Selene.)
</p>

<p>
Συνέβη δέ τι καὶ τοιοῦτον. ἐλθὼν ἐς τὸ Μεδιόλανον
ᾤκουν ἔν τινι προαστείῳ. ἐνταῦθα ἔπεμπεν
Εὐσεβία πολλάκις πρός με φιλοφρονουμένη καὶ
γράφειν κελεύουσα καὶ θαρρεῖν, ὑπὲρ ὅτου ἂν
δέωμαι. [C] γράψας ἐγὼ πρὸς αὐτὴν ἐπιστολὴν,
μᾶλλον δὲ ἱκετηρίαν ὅρκους ἔχουσαν τοιούτους·
Οὕτω παισὶ χρήσαιο κληρονόμοις· οὕτω τὰ καὶ
τὰ θεός σοι δοίη, πέμπε με οἴκαδε τὴν ταχίστην,
ἐκεῖνο ὑπειδόμην ὡς οὐκ ἀσφαλὲς εἰς
τὰ βασίλεια πρὸς αὐτοκράτορος γυναῖκα γράμματα
εἰσπέμπειν. ἱκέτευσα δὴ τοὺς θεοὺς νύκτωρ
δηλῶσαί μοι, εἰ χρὴ πέμπειν παρὰ τὴν βασιλίδα
τὸ γραμματεῖον· οἱ δὲ ἐπηπείλησαν, εἰ πέμψαιμι,
θάνατον αἴσχιστον. [D] ὡς δὲ ἀληθῆ ταῦτα γράφω,
καλῶ τοὺς θεοὺς ἅπαντας μάρτυρας. τὰ μὲν δὴ
γράμματα διὰ τοῦτο ἐπέσχον εἰσπέμψαι. ἐξ ἐκείνης
δέ μοι τῆς νυκτὸς λογισμὸς εἰσῆλθεν, οὗ καὶ
ὑμᾶς ἴσως ἄξιον ἀκοῦσαι. Νῦν, ἔφην, ἐγὼ τοῖς
θεοῖς ἀντιτάττεσθαι διανοοῦμαι, καὶ ὑπὲρ ἐμαυτοῦ
βουλεύεσθαι κρεῖττον νενόμικα τῶν πάντα εἰδότων.
καίτοι φρόνησις ἀνθρωπίνη πρὸς τὸ παρὸν
ἀφορῶσα μόνον [276] ἀγαπητῶς ἂν τύχοι καὶ μόγις τοῦ
πρὸς ὀλίγου ἀναμαρτήτου. διόπερ οὐδεὶς οὔθ᾽ ὑπὲρ
τῶν εἰς τριακοστὸν<note place='foot'>τριακοστὸν Hertlein suggests, τριακοσιοστὸν MSS.</note> ἔτος βουλεύεται οὔτε ὑπὲρ τῶν
ἤδη γεγονότων· τὸ μὲν γὰρ περιττόν, τὸ δὲ ἀδύνατον·
<pb n='262'/><anchor id='Pg262'/><anchor id='Pg263'/>
ἀλλ᾽ ὑπὲρ τῶν ἐν χερσὶ καὶ ὧν ἀρχαί τινές
εἰσιν ἤδη καὶ σπέρματα. φρόνησις δὲ ἡ παρὰ
τοῖς θεοῖς ἐπὶ τὸ μήκιστον, μᾶλλον δὲ ἐπὶ πᾶν
βλέπουσα μηνύει τε ὀρθῶς καὶ πράττει τὸ λῷον·
αἴτοι γάρ εἰσιν αὐτοὶ καθάπερ τῶν ὄντων, οὕτω
δὲ καὶ τῶν ἐσομένων. [B] οὐκοῦν εἰκὸς αὐτοὺς ὑπὲρ
τῶν παρόντων ἐπίστασθαι. τέως μὲν οὖν ἐδόκει
μοι κατὰ τοῦτο συνετωτέρα τῆς ἔμπροσθεν ἡ
δευτέρα γνώμη. σκοπῶν δὲ εἰς τὸ δίκαιον εὐθέως
ἔφην· Εἶτα σὺ μὲν ἀγανακτεῖς, εἴ τι τῶν σῶν κτημάτων
ἀποστεροίη σε τῆς ἑαυτοῦ χρήσεως ἢ καὶ
ἀποδιδράσκοι καλούμενον, [C] κἂν ἵππος τύχῃ κἂν
πρόβατον κἂν βοίδιον, ἄνθρωπος δὲ εἶναι βουλόμενος
οὐδὲ τῶν ἀγελαίων οὐδὲ τῶν συρφετωδῶν,
ἀλλὰ τῶν ἐπιεικῶν καὶ μετρίων ἀποστερεῖς σεαυτοῦ
τοὺς θεοὺς καὶ οὐκ ἐπιτρέπεις ἐφ᾽ ὅ, τι ἂν
ἐθέλωσι χρήσασθαι σοι; ὅρα μὴ πρὸς τῷ λίαν
ἀφρόνως καὶ τῶν δικαίων τῶν πρὸς τοὺς θεοὺς
ὀλιγώρως πράττῃς. ἡ δὲ ἀνδρεία ποῦ καὶ τίς; γελοῖον.
ἕτοιμος γοῦν εἶ καὶ θωπεῦσαι καὶ κολακεῦσαι
δέει τοῦ θανάτου, [D] ἐξὸν ἅπαντα καταβαλεῖν καὶ τοῖς
θεοῖς ἐπιτρέψαι πράττειν ὡς βούλαονται, διελόμενον
πρὸς αὐτοὺς τὴν ἐπιμέλειαν τὴν ἑαυτοῦ, καθάπερ
καὶ ὁ Σωκράτης ἠξίου, καὶ τὰ μὲν ἐπὶ σοὶ πράττειν
ὡς ἂν ἐνδέχηται, τὸ δὲ ὅλον ἐπ᾽ ἐκείνοις
ποιεῖσθαι, κεκτῆσθαι δὲ μηδὲν μηδὲ ἁρπάζειν, τὰ
<pb n='264'/><anchor id='Pg264'/><anchor id='Pg265'/>
διδόμενα δὲ παρ᾽ αὐτῶν ἀφελῶς<note place='foot'>ἀφελῶς Cobet, ἀσφαλῶς Hertlein, MSS.</note> δέχεσθαι. ταύτην
ἐγὼ [277] νομίσας οὐκ ἀσφαλῆ μόνον, ἀλλὰ πρέπουσαν
ἀνδρὶ μετρίῳ γνώμην, ἐπεὶ καὶ τὰ τῶν
θεῶν ἐσήμαινε ταύτῃ· τὸ γὰρ ἐπιβουλὰς εὐλαβούμενον
τὰς μελλούσας εἰς αἰσχρὸν καὶ προὖπτον
ἐμβαλεῖν ἑαυτὸν κίνδυνον δεινῶς ἐφαίνετό μοι
θορυβῶδες· εἶξαι καὶ ὑπήκουσα. καὶ τὸ μὲν
ὄνομά μοι ταχέως καὶ τὸ χλανίδιον περιεβλήθη
τοῦ καίσαρος· ἡ δὲ ἐπὶ τούτῳ δουλεία καὶ τὸ καθ᾽
ἑκάστην ἡμέραν ὑπὲρ αὐτῆς τῆς ψυχῆς ἐπικρεμάμενον
δέος Ἡράκλεις ὅσον καὶ οἷον· [B] κλεῖθρα
θυρῶν, θυρωροί, τῶν οἰκετῶν αἱ χεῖρες ἐρευνώμεναι,
μή τίς μοι παρὰ τῶν φίλων γραμματίδιον
κομίζῃ, θεραπεία ξένη· μόλις ἠδυνήθην οἰκέτας
ἐμαυτοῦ τέτταρας, παιδάρια μὲν δύο κομιδῇ μικρά,
δύο δὲ μείζονας, εἰς τὴν αὐλήν οἰκειότερόν με
θεραπεύσοντας εἰσαγαγεῖν, ὧν εἷς μοι μόνος καὶ
τὰ πρὸς θεοὺς συνειδὼς καὶ ὡς ἐνεδέχετο λάθρᾳ
συμπράττων· [C] ἐπεπίστευτο δὲ τῶν βιβλίων μου
τὴν φυλακήν, ὢν μόνος τῶν ἐμοὶ πολλῶν ἑταίρων
καὶ φίλων πιστῶν, εἷς ἰατρός, ὃς καί, ὅτι φίλος ὢν
ἐλελήθει, συναπεδήμησεν. οὕτω δὲ ἐδεδίειν ἐγὼ
ταῦτα καὶ ψοφοδεῶς εἲχον πρὸς αὐτά, ὥστε καὶ
βουλομένους εἰσιέναι τῶν φίλων πολλοὺς παρ᾽
ἐμὲ καὶ μάλ᾽ ἄκων ἐκώλυον, ἰδεῖν μὲν αὐτοὺς
ἐπιθυμῶν, ὀκνῶν δὲ ἐκείνοις τε καὶ ἐμαυτῷ γενέσθαι
συμφορῶν αἴτιος. ἀλλὰ ταῦτα μὲν ἔξωθέν
ἐστι, [D] τάδε δὲ ἐν αὐτοῖς τοῖς πράγμασι.
</p>

<p>
(What happened was somewhat as follows. When
I came to Milan I resided in one of the suburbs.
Thither Eusebia sent me on several occasions messages
of good-will, and urged me to write to her
without hesitation about anything that I desired.
Accordingly I wrote her a letter, or rather a petition
containing vows like these: <q>May you have children
to succeed you; may God grant you this and that, if
only you send me home as quickly as possible!</q> But
I suspected that it was not safe to send to the palace
letters addressed to the Emperor's wife. Therefore
I besought the gods to inform me at night whether
I ought to send the letter to the Empress. And
they warned me that if I sent it I should meet
the most ignominious death. I call all the gods to
witness that what I write here is true. For this
reason, therefore, I forbore to send the letter. But
from that night there kept occurring to me an
argument which it is perhaps worth your while also
to hear. <q>Now,</q> I said to myself, <q>I am planning
to oppose the gods, and I have imagined that I
can devise wiser schemes for myself than those who
know all things. And yet human wisdom, which
looks only to the present moment, may be thankful
if, with all its efforts, it succeed in avoiding mistakes
even for a short space. That is why no man takes
thought for things that are to happen thirty years
hence, or for things that are already past, for the one
is superfluous, the other impossible, but only for what
lies near at hand and has already some beginnings
and germs. But the wisdom of the gods sees very
far, or rather, sees the whole, and therefore it directs
aright and brings to pass what is best. For they are
the causes of all that now is, and so likewise of
all that is to be. Wherefore it is reasonable that they
should have knowledge about the present.</q> So far,
then, it seemed to me that on this reasoning my
second determination was wiser than my first. And
viewing the matter in the light of justice, I immediately
reflected: <q>Would you not be provoked if
one of your own beasts were to deprive you of its
services,<note place='foot'>An echo of Plato, <hi rend='italic'>Phaedo</hi> 62 <hi rend='smallcaps'>c</hi>; cf. <hi rend='italic'>Fragment of a Letter</hi>
297 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a</hi>.</note> or were even to run away when you called
it, a horse, or sheep, or calf, as the case might be?
And will you, who pretended to be a man, and not
even a man of the common herd or from the dregs
of the people, but one belonging to the superior and
reasonable class, deprive the gods of your service, and
not trust yourself to them to dispose of you as they
please? Beware lest you not only fall into great
folly, but also neglect your proper duties towards the
gods. Where is your courage, and of what sort
is it? A sorry thing it seems. At any rate, you are
ready to cringe and flatter from fear of death, and
yet it is in your power to lay all that aside and
leave it to the gods to work their will, dividing
with them the care of yourself, as Socrates, for
instance, chose to do: and you might, while
doing such things as best you can, commit the
whole to their charge; seek to possess nothing,
seize nothing, but accept simply what is vouchsafed
to you by them.</q> And this course I thought was not
only safe but becoming to a reasonable man, since the
response of the gods had suggested it. For to rush
headlong into unseemly and foreseen danger while
trying to avoid future plots seemed to me a topsy-turvy
procedure. Accordingly I consented to yield. And
immediately I was invested with the title and robe
of Caesar.<note place='foot'>Cf. Ammianus Marcellinus 15. 8.</note> The slavery that ensued and the fear
for my very life that hung over me every day,
Heracles, how great it was, and how terrible! My
doors locked, warders to guard them, the hands of
my servants searched lest one of them should convey
to me the most trifling letter from my friends,
strange servants to wait on me! Only with difficulty
was I able to bring with me to court four of my own
domestics for my personal service, two of them mere
boys and two older men, of whom only one knew of
my attitude to the gods, and, as far as he was able,
secretly joined me in their worship. I had entrusted
with the care of my books, since he was the only one
with me of many loyal comrades and friends, a
certain physician<note place='foot'>Oreibasius; cf. <hi rend='italic'>Letter</hi> 17.</note> who had been allowed to leave
home with me because it was not known that he was
my friend. And this state of things caused me such
alarm and I was so apprehensive about it, that
though many of my friends really wished to visit
me, I very reluctantly refused them admittance; for
though I was most anxious to see them, I shrank
from bringing disaster upon them and myself at the
same time. But this is somewhat foreign to my
narrative. The following relates to the actual course
of events.)
</p>

<pb n='266'/><anchor id='Pg266'/><anchor id='Pg267'/>

<p>
Τριακοσίους ἑξήκοντά μοι δοὺς στρατιώτας εἰς
τὸ τῶν Κελτῶν ἔθνος ἀνατετραμμένον ἔστειλε,
μεσοῦντος ἤδη τοῦ χειμῶνος, οὐκ ἄρχοντα μᾶλλον
τῶν ἐκεῖσε στρατοπέδων ἢ τοῖς ἐκεῖσε στρατηγοῖς
ὑπακούοντα.<note place='foot'>ὑπακούοντα Hertlein suggests, ὑπακούσοντα MSS.</note> ἐγέγραπτο γὰρ αὐτοῖς καὶ ἐνετέταλτο
διαρρήδην οὐ τοὺς πολεμίους μᾶλλον ἢ ἐμὲ
παραφυλάττειν, ὡς ἂν μὴ νεώτερόν τι πράξαιμι.
τούτων δὲ ὃν ἔφην τρόπον γενομένων, περὶ τὰς
τροπὰς τὰς θερινὰς [278] ἐπιτρέπει μοι βαδίζειν εἰς τὰ
στρατόπεδα τὸ σχῆμα καὶ τὴν εἰκόνα περιοίσοντι
τὴν ἑαυτοῦ· καὶ γάρ τοι καὶ τοῦτο εἴρητο καὶ
ἐγέγραπτο, ὅτι τοῖς Γάλλοις οὐ βασιλέα δίδωσιν,
ἀλλὰ τὸν τὴν ἑαυτοῦ πρὸς ἐκείνους εἰκόνα κομιοῦντα.
</p>

<p>
(Constantius gave me three hundred and sixty
soldiers, and in the middle of the winter<note place='foot'>355 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi></note> despatched
me into Gaul, which was then in a state of great
disorder; and I was sent not as commander of the
garrisons there but rather as a subordinate of the
generals there stationed. For letters had been sent
them and express orders given that they were to
watch me as vigilantly as they did the enemy, for
far I should attempt to cause a revolt. And
when all this had happened in the manner I have
described, about the summer solstice he allowed
me to join the army and to carry about with me
his dress and image. And indeed he had both said
and written that he was not giving the Gauls a
king but one who should convey to them his
image.)
</p>

<p>
Οὐ κακῶς δέ, ὡς ἀκηκόατε, τοῦ πρώτου στρατηγηθέντος
ἐνιαυτοῦ καὶ πραχθέντος σπουδαίου,
πρὸς τὰ χειμάδια [B] πάλιν ἐπανελθὼν εἰς τὸν
ἔσχατον κατέστην κίνδυνον. οὔτε γὰρ ἀθροίζειν
ἐξῆν μοι στρατόπεδον· ἕτερος γὰρ ἦν ὁ τούτου
κύριος· αὐτός τε ξὺν ὀλίγοις ἀποκεκλεισμένος,
εἶτα παρὰ τῶν πλησίον πόλεων αἰτηθεὶς ἐπικουρίαν,
ὧν εἶχον τὸ πλεῖστον ἐκείνοις δούς, αὐτὸς<note place='foot'>αὐτὸς MSS., Cobet, [αὐτὸς] Hertlein.</note>
ἀπελείφθην μόνος. ἐκεῖνα μὲν οὖν οὕτως ἐπράχθη
τότε. ὡς δὲ καὶ ὁ τῶν στρατοπέδων ἄρχων ἐν
ὑποψίᾳ γενόμενος αὐτῷ παρῃρέθη καὶ ἀπηλλάγη
τῆς ἀρχῆς, [C] οὐ σφόδρα ἐπιτήδειος δόξας, ἔγωγε
ἐνομίσθην ἥκιστα σπουδαῖος καὶ δεινὸς στρατηγός,
ἅτε πρᾷον ἐμαυτὸν παρασχὼν καὶ μέτριον. οὐ
<pb n='268'/><anchor id='Pg268'/><anchor id='Pg269'/>
γὰρ ᾤμην δεῖν ζυγομαχεῖν οὐδὲ παραστρατηγεῖν,
εἰ μή πού τι τῶν λίαν ἐπικινδένων ἑώρων ἢ δέον
γενέσθαι παρορώμενον ἢ καὶ τὴν ἀρχὴν μὴ δέον
γενέσθαι γιγνόμενον. ἅπαξ δὲ καὶ δεύτερον οὐ
καθηκόντως μοί τινων χρησαμένων, [D] ἐμαυτὸν ᾠήθην
χρῆναι τιμᾶν τῇ σιωπῇ, καὶ τοῦ λοιποῦ τὴν
χλανίδα περιέφερον καὶ τὴν εἰκόνα· τούτων γὰρ
τὸ τηνικαῦτα διενοούμην ἀποπεφάνθαι κύριος.
</p>

<p>
(Now when, as you have heard, the first campaign
was ended that year and great advantage gained,
I returned to winter quarters,<note place='foot'>At Vienne.</note> and there I was
exposed to the utmost danger. For I was not even
allowed to assemble the troops; this power was
entrusted to another, while I was quartered apart
with only a few soldiers, and then, since the neighbouring
towns begged for my assistance, I assigned to
them the greater part of the force that I had, and
so I myself was left isolated. This then was the
condition of affairs at that time. And when the
commander-in-chief<note place='foot'>Marcellus.</note> of the forces fell under the
suspicions of Constantius and was deprived by him
of his command and superseded, I in my turn was
thought to be by no means capable or talented
as a general, merely because I had shown myself
mild and moderate. For I thought I ought not
to fight against my yoke or interfere with the general
in command except when in some very dangerous
undertaking I saw either that something was being
overlooked, or that something was being attempted
that ought never to have been attempted at all.
But after certain persons had treated me with
disrespect on one or two occasions, I decided that for
the future I ought to show my own self-respect by
keeping silence, and henceforth I contented myself
with parading the imperial robe and the image. For
I thought that to these at any rate I had been given
a right.)
</p>

<p>
Ἐξ ὧν ὁ Κωνστάντιος νομίσας ὀλίγον<note place='foot'>ὀλίγον Hertlein suggests, ὀλίγῳ MSS.</note> μὲν
ἐπιδώσειν, οὐκ εἰς τοσοῦτον δὲ μεταβολῆς ἥξειν
τὰ τῶν Κελτῶν πράγματα, δίδωσί μοι τῶν
στρατοπέδων τὴν ἡγεμονίαν ἦρος ἀρχῇ. καὶ
στρατεύω μὲν ἀκμάζοντος τοῦ σίτου, πολλῶν
πάνυ Γερμανῶν [279] περὶ τὰς πεπορθημένας ἐν Κελτοῖς
πόλεις ἀδεῶς κατοικούντων. τὸ μὲν οὖν
πλῆθος τῶν πόλεων πέντε που καὶ τεσσαράκοντά
ἐστι, τείχη τὰ διηρπασμένα δίχα τῶν πύργων καὶ
τῶν ἐλασσόνων φρουρίων. ἧς δ᾽ ἐνέμοντο γῆς ἐπὶ
τάδε τοῦ Ῥήνου πάσης οἱ βάρβαροι τὸ μέγεθος
ὁπόσον ἀπὸ τῶν πηγῶν αὐτῶν ἀρχόμενος ἄχρι τοῦ
Ὠκεανοῦ περιλαμβάνει· τριακόσια δὲ ἀπεῖχον
τῆς ᾐόνος τοῦ Ῥήνου στάδια οἱ πρὸς ἡμᾶς οἰκοῦντες
ἔσχατοι, τριπλάσιον δὲ ἦν ἔτι τούτου πλάτος
τὸ καταλειφθὲν ἔρημον [B] ὑπὸ τῆς λεηλασίας, ἔνθα
οὐδὲ νέμειν ἐξῆν τοῖς Κελτοῖς τὰ βοσκήματα, καὶ
πόλεις τινὲς ἔρημοι τῶν ἐνοικούντων, αἷς οὔπω
παρῴκουν οἱ βάρβαροι. ἐν τούτοις οὖσαν καταλαβὼν
ἐγὼ τὴν Γαλατίαν πόλιν τε ἀνέλαβον τὴν
<pb n='270'/><anchor id='Pg270'/><anchor id='Pg271'/>
Ἀγριππίναν ἐπὶ τῇ Ῥήνῳ, πρὸ μηνῶν ἑαλωκυῖάν
που δέκα, καὶ τεῖχος Ἀργέντορα πλησίον πρὸς
ταῖς ὑπωρείαις αὐτοῦ τοῦ Βοσέγου, καὶ ἐμαχεσάμην
οὐκ ἀκλεῶς. [C] ἴσως καὶ εἰς ὑμᾶς ἀφίκετο ἡ
τοιαύτη μάχη. ἔνθα τῶν θεῶν δόντων μοι τὸν
βασιλέα τῶν πολεμίων αἰχμάλωτον, οὐκ ἐφθόνησα
τοῦ κατορθώματος Κωνσταντίῳ. καίτοι εἰ μὴ
θριαμβεύειν ἐξῆν, ἀποσφάττειν τὸν πολέμιον
κύριος ἦν, καὶ μέντοι διὰ πάσης αὐτὸν ἄγων τῆς
Κελτίδος ταῖς πόλεσιν ἐπιδεικνύειν καὶ ὥσπερ
ἐντρυφᾶν τοῦ Χνοδομαρίου [D] ταῖς συμφοραῖς. τούτων
οὐδὲν ᾠήθην δεῖν πράττειν, ἀλλὰ πρὸς τὸν
Κωνστάντιον αὐτὸν εὐθέως ἀπέπεμψα, τότε ἀπὸ
τῶν Κουάδων καὶ Σαυροματῶν ἐπανιόντα, συνέβη
τοίνυν, ἐμοῦ μὲν ἀγωνισαμένου, ἐκείνου δὲ ὁδεύσαντος
μόνον καὶ φιλίως ἐντυχόντος τοῖς παροικοῦσι
τὸν Ἴστρον ἔθνεσιν, οὐχ ἡμᾶς, ἀλλ᾽ ἐκεῖνον
θριαμβεῦσαι.
</p>

<p>
(After that, Constantius, thinking that there would
be some improvement, but not that so great a
transformation would take place in the affairs of
Gaul, handed over to me in the beginning of spring<note place='foot'>357 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi></note>
the command of all the forces. And when the
grain was ripe I took the field; for a great number
of Germans had settled themselves with impunity
near the towns they had sacked in Gaul. Now the
number of the towns whose walls had been dismantled
was about forty-five, without counting citadels and
smaller forts. And the barbarians then controlled
on our side of the Rhine the whole country that
extends from its sources to the Ocean. Moreover
those who were settled nearest to us were as much
as three hundred stades from the banks of the Rhine,
and a district three times as wide as that had been
left a desert by their raids; so that the Gauls could
not even pasture their cattle there. Then too there
were certain cities deserted by their inhabitants,
near which the barbarians were not yet encamped.
This then was the condition of Gaul when I took
it over. I recovered the city of Agrippina<note place='foot'>Cologne.</note> on the
Rhine which had been taken about ten months earlier,
and also the neighbouring fort of Argentoratum,<note place='foot'>Strasburg.</note>
near the foot-hills of the Vosges mountains, and
there I engaged the enemy not ingloriously. It may
be that the fame of that battle has reached even your
ears. There though the gods gave into my hands
as prisoner of war the king<note place='foot'>Chnodomar.</note> of the enemy, I did not
begrudge Constantius the glory of that success.
And yet though I was not allowed to triumph for it,
I had it in my power to slay my enemy, and moreover
I could have led him through the whole of Gaul and
exhibited him to the cities, and thus have luxuriated as
it were in the misfortunes of Chnodomar. I thought
it my duty to do none of these things, but sent
him at once to Constantius who was returning from
the country of the Quadi and the Sarmatians. So it
came about that, though I had done all the fighting
and he had only travelled in those parts and held
friendly intercourse with the tribes who dwell on the
borders of the Danube, it was not I but he who
triumphed.)
</p>

<p>
Τὸ δὴ μετὰ τοῦτο δεύτερος ἐνιαυτὸς καὶ πρίτος,
καὶ πάντες μὲν ἀπελήλαντο τῆς Γαλατίας οἱ
βάρβαροι, πλεῖσται δὲ ἀνελήφθησαν τῶν πόλεων,
παμπληθεῖς δὲ ἀπὸ τῆς Βρεττανίδος ναῦς ἀνήχθησαν.
ἑξακοσίων νηῶν ἀνήγαγον στόλον, [280] ὧν
τὰς τετρακοσίας ἐν οὐδὲ ὅλοις μησὶ δέκα ναυπηγησάμενος
πάσας εἰσήγαγον εἰς τὸν Ῥῆνον, ἔργον
οὐ μικρὸν διὰ τοὺς ἐπικειμένους καὶ παροικοῦντας
πλησίον βαρβάρους. ὁ γοῦν Φλωρέντιος οὕτως
ᾤετο τοῦτο ἀδύνατον, ὥστε ἀργύρου δισχιλίας
<pb n='272'/><anchor id='Pg272'/><anchor id='Pg273'/>
λίτρας ὑπέσχετο μισθὸν ἀποτίσειν τοῖς βαρβάροις
ὑπὲρ τῆς παρόδου, καὶ ὁ Κωνστάντιος
ὑπὲρ τούτου μαθών· ἐκοινώσατο γὰρ αὐτῷ περὶ
τῆς δόσεως· [B] ἐπέστειλε πρός με τὸ αὐτὸ πράττειν<note place='foot'>ἐπέστειλε πρός με τὸ αὐτὸ πράττειν Horkel, ἐπέστειλεν αὐτὸ
πρός με, πράττειν Hertlein, MSS.</note>
κελεύσας, εἰ μὴ παντάπασιν αἰσχρόν μοι φανείη.
πῶς δὲ οὐκ ἦν αἰσχρόν, ὅπου Κωνσταντίῳ τοιοῦτον
ἐφάνη, λίαν εἰωθότι θεραπεύειν τοὺς βαρβάρους;
ἐδόθη μὴν αὐτοῖς οὐδέν· ἀλλ᾽ ἐπ᾽ αὐτοὺς
στρατεύσας, ἀμυνόντων μοι καὶ παρεστώτων τῶν
θεῶν, ὑπεδεξάμην μὲν μοῖραν τοῦ Σαλίων ἔθνους,
Χαμάβους δὲ ἐξήλασα, πολλὰς βοῦς καὶ γύναια
μετὰ παιδαρίων συλλαβών. οὕτω δὲ πάντας
ἐφόβησα καὶ παρεσκεύασα καταπτῆξαι τὴν ἐμὴν
ἔφοδον, [C] ὥστε παραχρῆμα λαβεῖν ὁμήρους καὶ τῇ
σιτοπομπίᾳ παρασχεῖν ἀσφαλῆ κομιδήν.
</p>

<p>
(Then followed the second and third years of that
campaign, and by that time all the barbarians had
been driven out of Gaul, most of the towns had been
recovered, and a whole fleet of many ships had
arrived from Britain. I had collected a fleet of
six hundred ships, four hundred of which I had had
built in less than ten months, and I brought them all
into the Rhine, no slight achievement, on account of
the neighbouring barbarians who kept attacking me.
At least it seemed so impossible to Florentius that
he had promised to pay the barbarians a fee of two
thousand pounds weight of silver in return for a
passage. Constantius when he learned this&mdash;for
Florentius had informed him about the proposed
payment&mdash;wrote to me to carry out the agreement,
unless I thought it absolutely disgraceful. But how
could it fail to be disgraceful when it seemed so even
to Constantius, who was only too much in the habit
of trying to conciliate the barbarians? However, no
payment was made to them. Instead I marched
against them, and since the gods protected me and
were present to aid, I received the submission of part
of the Salian tribe, and drove out the Chamavi and
took many cattle and women and children. And I
so terrified them all, and made them tremble at my
approach that I immediately received hostages from
them and secured a safe passage for my food
supplies.)
</p>

<p>
Μακρόν ἐστι πάντα ἀπαριθμεῖσθαι καὶ τὰ καθ᾽
ἕκαστον γράφειν, ὅσα ἐν ἐνιαυτοῖς ἔπραξα τέτταρσι·
τὰ κεφάλαια δέ· τρίτον ἐπεραιώθην καῖσαρ
ἔτι τὸν Ῥῆνον· δισμυρίους ἀπῄτησα παρὰ τῶν βαρβάρων
ὑπὲρ τὸν Ῥῆνον ὄντας αἰχμαλώτους· ἐκ δυοῖν
ἀγώνοιν καὶ μιᾶς πολιορκίας χιλίους ἐξελὼν ἐζώγρησα,
οὐ τὴν ἄχρηστον ἡλικίαν, ἄνδρας δὲ ἡβῶντας·
[D] ἔπεμψα τῷ Κωνσταντίῳ τέτταρας ἀριθμοὺς
τῶν κρατίστων πεζῶν, τρεῖς ἄλλους τῶν ἐλαττόνων,
ἱππέων τάγματα δύο τὰ ἐντιμότατα· πόλεις
ἀνέλαβον νῦν μὲν δὴ τῶν θεῶν ἐθελόντων πάσας,
τότε δὲ ἀνειλήφειν ἐλάττους ὀλίγῳ τῶν τεσσαράκοντα.
μάρτυρας καλῶ τὸν Δία καὶ πάντας
θεοὺς πολιούχους τε καὶ ὁμογνίους ὑπὲρ τῆς ἐμῆς
προαιρέσεως εἰς αὐτὸν καὶ πίστεως, ὅτι τοιοῦτος
<pb n='274'/><anchor id='Pg274'/><anchor id='Pg275'/>
γέγονα περὶ αὐτόν, οἷον ἂν εἱλόμην ἐγὼ υἱὸν περὶ
ἐμὲ γενέσθαι. [281] τετίμηκα μὲν οὖν αὐτὸν ὡς οὐδεὶς
καισάρων οὐδένα τῶν ἔμπροσθεν αὐτοκρατόρων.
οὐδὲν γοῦν εἰς τὴν τήμερον ὑπὲρ ἐκείνων ἐγκαλεῖ
μοι, καὶ ταῦτα παρρησιασαμένῳ πρὸς αὐτόν, ἀλλὰ
γελοίους αἰτίας ὀργῆς ἀναπλάττει. Λουππικῖνον,
φησί, καὶ τρεῖς ἄλλους ἀνθρώπους κατέσχες· οὓς
εἰ καὶ κτείνας ἤμην ἐπιβουλεύσαντας ἔμοιγε
φανερῶς, ἐχρῆν τὴν ὑπὲρ τῶν παθόντων ὀργὴν
ἀφεῖναι τῆς ὁμονοίας ἕνεκα. τούτους δὲ οὐδὲν
ἄχαρι διαθεὶς ὡς [B] ταραχώδεις φύσει καὶ πολεμοποιοὺς
κατέσχον, πολλὰ πάνυ δαπανῶν εἰς αὐτοὺς
ἐκ τῶν δημοσίων, ἀφελόμενος δ᾽<note place='foot'>δ᾽ after ἀφελόμενος Hertlein suggests.</note> οὐδὲν τῶν ὑπαρχόντων
ἐκείνοις. ὁρᾶτε, πῶς ἐπεξιέναι τούτοις ὁ
Κωνστάντιος νομοθετεῖ. ὁ γὰρ χαλεπαίνων ὑπὲρ
τῶν προσηκόντων μηδὲν ἆρ᾽ οὐκ ὀνειδίζει μοι καὶ
κατεγελᾷ τῆς μωρίας, ὅτι τον φονέα πατρός,
ἀδελφῶν, ἀνεψιῶν, ἁπάσης ὡς ἔπος εἰπεῖν τῆς
κοινῆς ἡμῶν ἑστίας καὶ συγγενείας τὸν δήμιον εἰς
τοῦτο ἐθεράπευσα; [C] σκοπεῖτε δὲ ὅπως καὶ γενόμενος
αὐτοκράτωρ ἔτι φεραπευτικῶς αὐτῷ προσηνέχθην
ἐξ ὧν ἐπέστειλα.
</p>

<p>
(It would take too long to enumerate everything
and to write down every detail of the task that
I accomplished within four years. But to sum it all
up: Three times, while I was still Caesar, I crossed
the Rhine; one thousand persons who were held as
captives on the further side of the Rhine I demanded
and received back; in two battles and one siege
I took captive ten thousand prisoners, and those not
of unserviceable age but men in the prime of life; I
sent to Constantius four levies of excellent infantry,
three more of infantry not so good, and two very
distinguished squadrons of cavalry. I have now with
the help of the gods recovered all the towns, and by
that time I had already recovered almost forty. I
call Zeus and all the gods who protect cities and our
race to bear witness as to my behaviour towards
Constantius and my loyalty to him, and that I
behaved to him as I would have chosen that my
own son should behave to me.<note place='foot'>Cf. Isocrates, <hi rend='italic'>To Demonicus</hi> 14.</note> I have paid him
more honour than any Caesar has paid to any
Emperor in the past. Indeed, to this very day
he has no accusation to bring against me on that
score, though I have been entirely frank in my
dealings with him, but he invents absurd pretexts
for his resentment. He says, <q>You have detained
Lupicinus and three other men.</q> And supposing I
had even put them to death after they had openly
plotted against me, he ought for the sake of keeping
peace to have renounced his resentment at their
fate. But I did those men not the least injury, and
I detained them because they are by nature quarrelsome
and mischief-makers. And though I am spending
large sums of the public money on them, I have
robbed them of none of their property. Observe
how Constantius really lays down the law that I
ought to proceed to extremities with such men!
For by his anger on behalf of men who are not
related to him at all, does he not rebuke and ridicule
me for my folly in having served so faithfully
the murderer of my father, my brothers, my cousins;
the executioner as it were of his and my whole
family and kindred? Consider too with what deference
I have continued to treat him even since I
became Emperor, as is shown in my letters.)
</p>

<p>
Καὶ τὰ πρὸ τούτου δὲ ὁποῖός τις γέγονα περὶ
αὐτὸν ἐντεῦθεν εἴσεσθε. αἰσθόμενος, ὅτι τῶν
ἁμαρτανομένων κληρονομήσω μὲν αὐτὸς τὴν
ἀδοξίαν καὶ τὸν κίνδυνον, ἐξεργασθήσεται δὲ
ἑτέροις τὰ πλεῖστα, [D] πρῶτον μὲν ἱκέτευον, εἰ ταῦτα
<pb n='276'/><anchor id='Pg276'/><anchor id='Pg277'/>
πράττειν αὐτῷ φαίνοιτο καὶ πάντως ἐμὲ προσαγορεύειν
καίσαρα δεδογμένον εἴη, ἄνδρας ἀγαθοὺς
καὶ σπουδαίους δοῦναί μοι τοὺς ὑπουργοῦντας· ὁ
δὲ πρότερον ἔδωκε τοὺς μοχθηροτάτους. ὡς δὲ ὁ
μὲν εἷς ὁ πονηρότατος καὶ μάλα ἄσμενος<note place='foot'>ἄσμενος</note> ὑπήκουσεν,
οὐδεὶς δὲ ἠξίου τῶν ἄλλων, ἄνδρα δίδωσιν ἄκων
ἐμοὶ καὶ μάλα ἀγαθὸν Σαλούστιον, ὃς διὰ τὴν
ἀρετὴν εὐθέως αὐτῷ γέγονεν ὕποπτος. οὐκ ἀρκεσθεὶς
ἐγὼ τῷ τοιούτῳ, βλέπων δὲ πρὸς τὸ
διάφορον τοῦ τρόπου καὶ κατανόησας<note place='foot'>βλέπων ... κατανόησας Horkel, κατανόησας ... βλέπων
Hertlein, MSS.</note> τῷ μὲν ἄγαν
αὐτὸν πιστεύοντα, [282] τῷ δὲ οὐδ᾽ ὅλως προσέχοντα,
τῆς δεξιᾶς αὐτοῦ καὶ τῶν γονάτων ἁψάμενος·
Τούτων, ἔφην, οὐδείς ἐστί μοι συνήθης οὐδὲ
γέγονεν ἔμπροσθεν· ἐπιστάμενος δὲ αὐτοὺς ἐκ
φήμης, σοῦ κελεύσαντος, ἑταίρους ἐμαυτοῦ καὶ
φίλους νομίζω, τοῖς πάλαι γνωρίμοις ἐπ᾽ ἴσης
τιμῶν. οῦ μὴν δίκαιον ἢ τούτοις ἐπιτετράφθαι τὰ
ἐμὰ ἢ τὰ τούτων ἡμῖν συγκινδυνεῦσαι. τί οὖν
ἱκετεύω; γραπτοὺς ἡμῖν δὸς ὥσπερ νόμους, [B] τίμων
ἀπέχεσθαι χρὴ καὶ ὅσα πράττειν ἐπιτρέπεις.
δῆλον γάρ, ὅτι τὸν μὲν πειθόμενον ἐπαινέσεις, τὸν
δὲ ἀπειθοῦντα κολάσεις, εἰ καὶ ὅ, τι μάλιστα
νομίζω μηδένα ἀπειθήσειν.
</p>

<p>
(And how I behaved to him before that you shall
now learn. Since I was well aware that whenever
mistakes were made I alone should incur the disgrace
and danger, though most of the work was
carried on by others, I first of all implored him, if
he had made up his mind to that course and was
altogether determined to proclaim me Caesar, to give
me good and able men to assist me. He however at
first gave me the vilest wretches. And when one, the
most worthless of them, had very gladly accepted
and no one of the others consented, he gave me
with a bad grace an officer who was indeed excellent,
Sallust, who on account of his virtue has at once
fallen under his suspicion. And since I was not
satisfied with such an arrangement and saw how his
manner to them varied, for I observed that he trusted
one of them too much and paid no attention at all to
the other, I clasped his right hand and his knees and
said: <q>I have no acquaintance with any of these
men nor have had in the past. But I know them by
report, and since you bid me I regard them as my
comrades and friends and pay them as much respect
as I would to old acquaintances. Nevertheless it is
not just that my affairs should be entrusted to them
or that their fortunes should be hazarded with mine.
What then is my petition? Give me some sort of
written rules as to what I must avoid and what you
entrust to me to perform. For it is clear that you
will approve of him who obeys you and punish him
who is disobedient, though indeed I am very sure
that no one will disobey you.</q>)
</p>

<p>
Ὅσα μὲν οὖν ἐπεχείρησεν ὁ Πεντάδιος αὐτίκα
καινοτομεῖν, οὐδὲν χρὴ λέγειν· ἀντέπραττον δὲ
ἐγὼ πρὸς πάντα, καὶ γίνεταί μοι δυσμενὴς ἐκεῖθεν.
εἶτ᾽ ἄλλον λαβὼν καὶ παρασκευάσας δεύτερον καὶ
τρίτον, Παῦλον, [C] Γαυδέντιον, τοὺς ὀνομαστοὺς ἐπ᾽
<pb n='278'/><anchor id='Pg278'/><anchor id='Pg279'/>
ἑμὲ μισθωσάμενος συκοφάντας, Σαλούστιον μὲν
ὡς ἐμοὶ φίλον ἀποστῆναι παρασκευάζει, Λουκιλιανὸν
δὲ δοθῆναι διάδοχον αὐτίκα. καὶ μικρὸν
ὕστερον καὶ Φλωρέντιος ἦν ἐχθρὸς ἐμοὶ διὰ τὰς
πλεονεξίας, αἷς ἠναντιούμην. πείθουσιν οὗτοι τὸν
Κωνστάντιον ἀφελέσθαι με τῶν στρατοπέδων
ἁπάντων, ἴσως τι καὶ ὑπὸ τῆς ζηλοτυπίας τῶν
κατορθωμάτων κνιζόμενον, [D] καὶ γράφει γράμματα
πολλῆς μὲν ἀτιμίας εἰς ἐμὲ πλήρη, Κελτοῖς δὲ
ἀνάστασιν ἀπειλοῦντα· μικροῦ γὰρ δέω φάναι τὸ
στρατιωτικὸν ἅπαν ἀδιακρίτως τὸ μαχιμώτατον
ἀπαγαγεῖν τῆς Γαλατίας ἐκέλευσεν, ἐπιτάξας τοῦτο
τὸ ἔργον Λουππικίνῳ τε καὶ Γιντωνίῳ, ἐμοὶ δὲ ὡς
ἂν πρὸς μηδὲν ἐναντιωθείην αὐτοῖς ἐπέστειλεν.
</p>

<p>
(Now I need not mention the innovations that
Pentadius at once tried to introduce. But I kept
opposing him in everything and for that reason he
became my enemy. Then Constantius chose another
and a second and a third and fashioned them for his
purpose, I mean Paul and Gaudentius, those notorious
sycophants; he hired them to attack me and
then took measures to remove Sallust, because he
was my friend, and to appoint Lucilianus immediately,
as his successor. And a little later Florentius also
became my enemy on account of his avarice which I
used to oppose. These men persuaded Constantius,
who was perhaps already somewhat irritated by
jealousy of my successes, to remove me altogether
from command of the troops. And he wrote letters
full of insults directed against me and threatening
ruin to the Gauls. For he gave orders for the withdrawal
from Gaul of, I might almost say, the whole
of the most efficient troops without exception, and
assigned this commission to Lupicinus and Gintonius,
while to me he wrote that I must oppose them in
nothing.)
</p>

<p>
Ἐνταῦθα μέντοι τίνα τρόπον τὰ τῶν θεῶν
εἴποιμ᾽ [283] ἂν ἔργα πρὸς ὑμᾶς; διενοούμην· μάρτυρες
δὲ αὐτοί· πᾶσαν ἀπορρίψας τὴν βασιλικὴν πολυτέλειαν
καὶ παρασκευὴν ἡσυχάζειν, πράττειν
δὲ οὐδὲν ὅλως. ἀνέμενον δὲ Φλωρέντιον παραγενέσθαι
καὶ τὸν Λουππικῖνον· ἦν γὰρ ὁ μὲν περὶ
τὴν Βίενναν, ὁ δὲ ἐν ταῖς Βρεττανίαις. ἐν τούτῳ
θόρυβος πολὺς [B] ἦν περὶ πάντας τοὺς ἰδιώτας καὶ
τοὺς στρατιώτας, καὶ γράφει τις ἀνώνυμον γραμματεῖον<note place='foot'>γραμματεῖον Horkel adds, δέλτον Naber.</note>
εἰς τὴν ἀστυγείτονά μοι πόλιν πρὸς τοὺς
Πετουλάντας τουτουσὶ καὶ Κελτούς· ὀνομάζεται
δὲ οὕτω τὰ τάγματα· ἐν ᾧ πολλὰ μὲν ἐγέγραπτο
κατ᾽ ἐκείνου, πολλοὶ δὲ ὑπὲρ τῆς Γαλλιῶν προδοσίας
ὀδυρμοί· καὶ μέντοι καὶ τὴν ἐμὴν ἀτιμίαν
ὁ τὸ γραμματεῖον συγγράψας ἀπωδύρετο. τοῦτο
κομισθὲν ἐκίνησε πάντας, οἳ τὰ Κωνσταντίου
μάλιστα ἐφρόνουν, [C] ἐπιθέσθαι μοι κατὰ τὸ καρτερώτατον,
<pb n='280'/><anchor id='Pg280'/><anchor id='Pg281'/>
ὅπως ἤδη τοὺς στρατιώτας ἐκπέμψαιμι,
πρὶν καὶ εἰς τοὺς ἄλλους ἀριθμοὺς ὅμοια
ῥιφῆναι. καὶ γὰρ οὐδὲ ἄλλος τις παρῆν τῶν
δοκούντων εὔνως ἔχειν ἐμοί, Νεβρίδιος δέ, Πεντάδιος,
Δεκέντιος, ὁ παρ᾽ αὐτοῦ πεμφθεὶς ἐπ᾽
αὐτὸ τοῦτο Κωνσταντίου. λέγοντος δέ μου χρῆναι
περιμένειν ἔτι Λουππικῖνον καὶ Φλωρέντιον, οὐδεὶς
ἤκουσεν, ἀλλ᾽ ἔλεγον πάντες τοὐναντίον ὅτι δεῖ
Ποιεῖν, εἰ μὴ βούλομαι ταῖς προλαβούσαις ὑποψίαις
ὥσπερ ἀπόδειξιν [D] καὶ τεκμήριον τοῦτο
προσθεῖναι. εἶτα προσέθεσαν ὡς Νῦν μὲν ἐκπεμφθέντων
αὐτὼν σόν ἐστι τὸ ἔργον, ἀφικομένων δὲ
τούτων οὐ σοὶ τοῦτο, ἀλλ᾽ ἐκείνοις λογιεῖται
Κωνστάντιος, σὺ δὲ ἐν αἰτίᾳ γενήσῃ. γράψαι δή<note place='foot'>δή Hertlein would add.</note>
με ἔπεισαν αὐτῷ, μᾶλλον δὲ ἐβιάσαντο· πείθεται
μὲν γὰρ ἐκεῖνος, ᾧπερ ἔξεστι καὶ μὴ πεισθῆναι,
βιάζεσθαι δὲ οἷς ἂν ἐξῇ, τοῦ πείθειν οὐδὲν
προσδέονται· οὔκουν οὐδὲ οἱ βιασθέντες τῶν
πεπεισμένων εἰσίν, ἀλλὰ τῶν ἀναγκασθέντων.
ἐσκοποῦμεν ἐνταῦθα, [284] ποίαν ὁδὸν αὐτοὺς χρὴ
βαδίζειν, διττῆς οὔσης. ἐγὼ μὲν ἠξίουν ἑτέραν
τραπῆναι, οἱ δὲ αὖθις ἀναγκάζουσιν ἐκείνην ἰέναι,
μὴ τοῦτο αὐτὸ γενόμενον ὥσπερ ἀφορμήν τινα
στάσεως τοῖς στρατιώταις παράσχῃ καὶ ταραχῆς
τινος αἴτιον γένηται, εἶτα στασιάζειν ἅπαξ ἀρξάμενοι
πάντα ἀθρόως ταράξωσιν. ἐδόκει τὸ δέος
οὐ παντάπασιν ἄλογον εἶναι τῶν ἀνθρώπων.
</p>

<p>
(And now in what terms shall I describe to you the
work of the gods? It was my intention, as they will
bear me witness, to divest myself of all imperial
splendour and state and remain in peace, taking no
part whatever in affairs. But I waited for Florentius
and Lupicinus to arrive; for the former was at
Vienne, the latter in Britain. Meanwhile there was
great excitement among the civilians and the troops,
and someone wrote an anonymous letter to the town
near where I was,<note place='foot'>Julian was at Paris.</note> addressed to the Petulantes and
the Celts&mdash;those were the names of the legions&mdash;full
of invectives against Constantius and of lamentations
about his betrayal of the Gauls. Moreover the
author of the letter lamented bitterly the disgrace
inflicted on myself. This letter when it arrived
provoked all those who were most definitely on the
side of Constantius to urge me in the strongest terms
to send away the troops at once, before similar letters
could be scattered broadcast among the rest of the
legions. And indeed there was no one there belonging
to the party supposed to be friendly to me, but
only Nebridius, Pentadius, and Decentius, the latter
of whom had been despatched for this very purpose
by Constantius. And when I replied that we ought
to wait still longer for Lupicinus and Florentius, no
one listened to me, but they all declared that we
ought to do the very opposite, unless I wished to add
this further proof and evidence for the suspicions
that were already entertained about me. And they
added this argument: <q>If you send away the troops
now it will be regarded as your measure, but when
the others come Constantius will give them not you
the credit and you will be held to blame.</q> And so
they persuaded or rather compelled me to write
to him. For he alone may be said to be persuaded
who has the power to refuse, but those who can use
force have no need to persuade as well;<note place='foot'>Cf. Thucydides I, lxxvii. 2.</note> then again
where force is used there is no persuasion, but a man
is the victim of necessity. Thereupon we discussed
by which road, since there were two, the troops
had better march. I preferred that they should take
one of these, but they immediately compelled them
to take the other, for fear that the other route if
chosen should give rise to mutiny among the troops
and cause some disturbance, and that then, when
they had once begun to mutiny, they might throw
all into confusion. Indeed such apprehension on
their part seemed not altogether without grounds.)
</p>

<p>
Ἦλθε τὰ τάγματα, ὑπήντησα κατὰ τὸ νενομισμένον
αὐτοῖς, [B] ἔχεσθαι τῆς ὁδοῦ προύτρεψα· μίαν
<pb n='282'/><anchor id='Pg282'/><anchor id='Pg283'/>
ἡμέραν ἐπέμεινεν, ἄχρις ἧς οὐδὲν ᾔδειν ἐγὼ τῶν
βεβουλευμένων αὐτοῖς· ἴστω Ζεύς, Ἥλιος, Ἄρης,
Ἀθηνᾶ καὶ πάντες θεοί, ὡς οὐδὲ ἐγγὺς ἀφίκετό
μού τις τοιαύτη ὑπόνοια ἄχρι δείλης αὐτῆς· ὀψίας
δὲ ἤδη περὶ ἡλίου δυσμὰς ἐμηνύθη μοι, καὶ αὐτίκα
τὰ βασίλεια περιείληπτο, καὶ ἐβόων πάντες, ἔτι
φροντίζοντός μου τί χρὴ ποιεῖν καὶ οὔπω σφόδρα
πιστεύοντος· [C] ὔτυχον γὰρ ἔτι τῆς γαμετῆς ζώσης
μοι ἀναπαυσόμενος ἰδίᾳ πρὸς τὸ πλησίον ὑπερῷον
ἀνελθών. εἶτα ἐκεῖθεν· ἀνεπέπτατο γὰρ ὁ τοῖχος·
προσεκύνησα τὸν Δία. γενομένης δὲ ἔτι μείζονος
τῆς βοῆς καὶ θορυβουμένων πάντων ἐν τοῖς βασιλείοις,
ᾐτέομεν τὸν θεὸν δοῦναι τέρας. αὐτὰρ ὅ γ᾽
ἡμῖν δεῖξε καὶ ἠνώγει πεισθῆναι καὶ μὴ προσεναντιοῦσθαι
τοῦ στρατοπέδου τῇ προθυμίᾳ.
γενομένων ὅμως [D] ἐμοὶ καὶ τούτων τῶν σημείων, οὐκ
εἶξα ἑτοίμως, ἀλλ᾽ ἀντέσχον εἰς ὅσον ἠδυνάμην,
καὶ οὔτε τὴν πρόσρησιν οὔτε τὸν στέφανον προσιέμην.
ἐπεὶ δὲ οὔτε εἷς ὢν<note place='foot'>ὢν Cobet, τῶν Hertlein, MSS.</note> πολλῶν ἠδυνάμην
κρατεῖν οἵ τε τοῦτο βουλόμενοι γενέσθαι θεοὶ τοὺς
μὲν παρώξυνον, ἐμοὶ δὲ ἔθελγον τὴν γνώμην, ὥρᾳ
που τρίτῃ σχεδὸν οὐκ οἶδα οὗτινός μοι στρατιώτου
δόντος μανιάκην περιεθέμην καὶ ἦλθον εἰς τὰ
βασίλεια, ἔνδοθεν ἀπ᾽ αὐτῆς, ὡς ἴσασιν οἱ θεοί,
στένων τῆς καρδίας. [285] καίτοι χρῆν δήπουθεν πιστεύοντα
τῷ φήναντι θεῷ τὸ τέρας θαρρεῖν· ἀλλ᾽
<pb n='284'/><anchor id='Pg284'/><anchor id='Pg285'/>
ᾐσχυνόμην δεινῶς καὶ κατεδυόμην, εἰ δόξαιμι μὴ
πιστῶς ἄχρι τέλους ὑπακοῦσαι Κωνσταντίῳ.
</p>

<p>
(The legions arrived, and I, as was customary, went
to meet them and exhorted them to continue their
march. For one day they halted, and till that time
I knew nothing whatever of what they had
determined; I call to witness Zeus, Helios, Ares,
Athene, and all the other gods that no such suspicion
even entered my mind until that very evening. It
was already late, when about sunset the news was
brought to me, and suddenly the palace was surrounded
and they all began to shout aloud, while I
was still considering what I ought to do and feeling
by no means confident. My wife was still alive and
it happened, that in order to rest alone, I had gone
to the upper room near hers. Then from there
through an opening in the wall I prayed to Zeus.
And when the shouting grew still louder and all
was in a tumult in the palace I entreated the
god to give me a sign; and thereupon he showed
me a sign<note place='foot'><p><hi rend='italic'>Odyssey</hi> 3. 173.</p>
<p>
ᾐτέομεν δὲ θεὸν φῆναι τέρας, αὐτὰρ ὅ γ᾽ ἡμῖν
δεῖξε καὶ ἠνώγει.
</p></note> and bade me yield and not oppose myself
to the will of the army. Nevertheless even after
these tokens had been vouchsafed to me I did not
yield without reluctance, but resisted as long as I
could, and would not accept either the salutation<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> the title of Augustus.</note>
or the diadem. But since I could not singlehanded
control so many, and moreover the gods, who willed
that this should happen, spurred on the soldiers and
gradually softened my resolution, somewhere about
the third hour some soldier or other gave me the
collar and I put it on my head and returned to the
palace, as the gods know groaning in my heart.
And yet surely it was my duty to feel confidence
and to trust in the god after he had shown me
the sign; but I was terribly ashamed and ready to
sink into the earth at the thought of not seeming
to obey Constantius faithfully to the last.)
</p>

<p>
Πολλῆς οὖν οὔσης περὶ τὰ βασίλεια κατηφείας,
τοῦτον εὐθὺς οἱ Κωνσταντίου φίλοι τὸν καιρὸν
ἁρπάσαι διανοηθέντες ἐπιβουλήν μοι ῥάπτουσιν
αὐτίκα καί διένειμαν τοῖς στρατιώταις χρήματα,
δυοῖν θάτερον προσδοκῶντες, ἢ διαστήσειν ἀλλήλους
ἢ [B] καὶ παντάπασιν ἐπιθήσεσθαι<note place='foot'>ἐπιθήσεσθαι Cobet, ἐπιθέσθαι Hertlein, MSS.</note> μοι φανερῶς.
αἰσθόμενός τις τῶν ἐπιτεταγμένων τῇ προόδῳ τῆς
ἐμῆς γαμετῆς λάθρᾳ πραττόμενον αὐτὸ ἐμοὶ μὲν
πρῶτον ἐμήνυσεν, ὡς δὲ ἑώρα με μηδὲν προσέχοντα,
παραφρονήσας ὥσπερ οἱ θεόληπτοι δημοσίᾳ
βοᾶν ἤρξατο κατὰ τὴν ἀγοράν· Ἄνδρες
στρατιῶται καὶ ξένοι καὶ πολῖται, μὴ προδῶτε
τὸν αὐτοκράτορα. εἶτα ἐμπίπτει θυμὸς εἰς τοὺς
στρατιώτας, καὶ πάντες εἰς τὰ βασίλεια μετὰ τῶν
ὅπλων ἔθεον. [C] καταλαβόντες δέ με ζῶντα καὶ
χαρέντες ὥσπερ οἱ τοὺς ἐξ ἀνελπίστων ὀφθέντας
φίλους ἄλλος ἄλλοθεν περιέβαλλον καὶ περιέπλεκον
καὶ ἐπὶ τῶν ὤμων ἔφερον, καὶ ἦν πως τὸ
πρᾶγμα θέας ἄξιον, ἐνθουσιασμῷ γὰρ ἐῴκει. ὡς
δέ με ἁπανταχόθεν περιέσχον, ἐξῄτουν ἅπαντας
τοὺς Κωνσταντίου φίλους ἐπὶ τιμωρίᾳ. πηλίκον
ἠγωνισάμην ἀγῶνα σῶσαι [D] βουλόμενος αὐτούς,
ἴσασιν οἱ θεοὶ πάντες.
</p>

<p>
(Now since there was the greatest consternation
in the palace, the friends of Constantius thought
they would seize the occasion to contrive a plot
against me without delay, and they distributed
money to the soldiers, expecting one of two things,
either that they would cause dissension between me
and the troops, or no doubt that the latter would
attack me openly. But when a certain officer
belonging to those who commanded my wife's escort
perceived that this was being secretly contrived, he
first reported it to me and then, when he saw that I
paid no attention to him, he became frantic, and like
one possessed he began to cry aloud before the
people in the market-place, <q>Fellow soldiers,
strangers, and citizens, do not abandon the Emperor!</q>
Then the soldiers were inspired by a frenzy of rage
and they all rushed to the palace under arms. And
when they found me alive, in their delight, like men
who meet friends whom they had not hoped to see
again, they pressed round me on this side and on
that, and embraced me and carried me on their
shoulders. And it was a sight worth seeing, for they
were like men seized with a divine frenzy. Then
after they had surrounded me on all sides they
demanded that I give up to them for punishment the
friends of Constantius. What fierce opposition I had
to fight down in my desire to save those persons is
known to all the gods.)
</p>

<p>
Ἀλλὰ δὴ τὰ μετὰ τοῦτο πῶς πρὸς τὸν
Κωνστάντιον διεπραξάμην; οὔπω καὶ τήμερον
ἐν ταῖς πρὸς αὐτὸν ἐπιστολαῖς τῇ δοθείσῃ
<pb n='286'/><anchor id='Pg286'/><anchor id='Pg287'/>
μοι παρὰ τῶν θεῶν ἐπωνυμίᾳ κεχρημαι, καίσαρα
δὲ ἐμαυτὸν γέγραφα, καὶ πέπεικα τοὺς στρατιώτας
ὀμόσαι μοι μηδενὸς ἐπιθυμήσειν, εἴπερ ἡμῖν
ἐπιτρέψειεν ἀδεῶς οἰκεῖν τὰς Γαλλίας, τοῖς
πεπραγμένοις συναινέσας. [286] ἅπαντα τὰ παρ᾽ ἐμοὶ
τάγματα πρὸς αὐτὸν ἔπεμψεν ἐπιστολάς, ἱκετεύοντα
περὶ τῆς πρὸς ἀλλήλους ἡμῖν ὁμονοίας.
ὁ δὲ ἀντὶ τούτων ἐπέβαλεν ἡμῖν τοὺς βαρβάρους,
ἐχθρὸν δὲ ἀνηγόρευσέ με παρ᾽ ἐκείνοις, καὶ
μισθοὺς ἐτέλεσεν, ὅπως τὸ Γαλλιῶν ἔθνος πορθηθείη,
γράφων τε ἐν τοῖς ἐν Ἰταλίᾳ παραφυλάττειν
τοὺς ἐκ τῶν Γαλλιῶν παρεκελεύετο, [B] καὶ περὶ
τοὺς Γαλλικοὺς ὅρους ἐν ταῖς πλησίον πόλεσιν
εἰς τριακοσίας μυριάδας μεδίμνων πυροῦ κατειργασμένου
ἐν τῇ Βριγαντίᾳ, τοσοῦτον ἕτερον
περὶ τὰς Κοττίας Ἄλπεις ὡς ἐπ᾽ ἐμὲ στρατεύσων
ἐκέλευσε παρασκευασθῆναι. καὶ ταῦτα οὐ λόγοι,
σαφῆ δὲ ἔργα. καὶ γὰρ ἃς γέγραφεν ἐπιστολὰς
ὑπὸ τῶν βαρβάρων κομισθείσας ἐδεξάμην, καὶ
τὰς τροφὰς τὰς παρεσκευασμένας κατέλαβον
[C] καὶ τὰς ἐπιστολὰς Ταύρου. πρὸς τούτοις ἔτι
νῦν μοι ὡς καίσαρι<note place='foot'>ὡς καίσαρι Hertlein suggests, καίσαρι MSS.</note> γράφει, καὶ οὐδὲ συνθήσεσθαι
πώποτε πρός με ὑπέστη, ἀλλ᾽ Ἐπίκτητόν
τινα τῶν Γαλλιῶν<note place='foot'>Athanasius says that Epictetus was bishop of Centumcellae;
hence Petavius suggests Κεντουμκελλῶν for τῶν
Γαλλιῶν.</note> ἐπίσκοπον ἔπεμψεν ὡς πιστά
μοι περὶ τῆς ἀσφαλείας τῆς ἐμαυτοῦ παρέξοντα,
καὶ τοῦτο θρυλεῖ δι᾽ ὅλων αὐτοῦ τῶν ἐπιστολῶν,
ὡς οὐκ ἀφαιρησόμενος τοῦ ζῆν, ὑπὲρ δὲ τῆς
τιμῆς οὐδὲν μνημονεύει. ἐγὼ δὲ τοὺς μὲν ὅρκους
<pb n='288'/><anchor id='Pg288'/><anchor id='Pg289'/>
αὐτοῦ τὸ τῆς παραοιμίας οἶμαι δεῖν εἰς τέφραν
γράφειν, οὕτως εἰσὶ πιστοί· [D] τῆς τιμῆς δὲ οὐ τοῦ
καλοῦ καὶ πρέποντος μόνον, ἀλλὰ καὶ τῆς τῶν
φίλων ἕνεκα σωτηρίας ἀντέχομαι· καὶ οὔπω
φημὶ τὴν πανταχοῦ γῆς γυμναζομένην πικρίαν.
</p>

<p>
(But further, how did I behave to Constantius after
this? Even to this day I have not yet used in my
letters to him the title which was bestowed on me
by the gods, but I have always signed myself Caesar,
and I have persuaded the soldiers to demand nothing
more if only he would allow us to dwell peaceably in
Gaul and would ratify what has been already done.
All the legions with me sent letters to him praying
that there might be harmony between us. But
instead of this he let loose against us the barbarians,
and among them proclaimed me his foe and paid
them bribes so that the people of the Gauls might be
laid waste; moreover he wrote to the forces in Italy
and bade them be on their guard against any who
should come from Gaul; and on the frontiers of
Gaul in the cities near by he ordered to be got ready
three million bushels of wheat which had been
ground at Brigantia,<note place='foot'>Bregentz, on Lake Constance.</note> and the same amount near the
Cottian Alps, with the intention of marching to
oppose me. These are not mere words but deeds
that speak plain. In fact the letters that he wrote
I obtained from the barbarians who brought them to
me; and I seized the provisions that had been made
ready, and the letters of Taurus. Besides, even now
in his letters he addresses me as <q>Caesar</q> and
declares that he will never make terms with me: but
he sent one Epictetus, a bishop of Gaul,<note place='foot'>Epictetus was bishop of Centumcellae (Civita Vecchia);
see critical note.</note> to offer a
guarantee for my personal safety; and throughout
his letters he keeps repeating that he will not take
my life, but about my honour he says not a word.
As for his oaths, for my part I think they should, as
the proverb says, be written in ashes,<note place='foot'>cf. <q>Write in dust</q> or <q>write in water.</q></note> so little do
they inspire belief. But my honour I will not give
up, partly out of regard for what is seemly and
fitting, but also to secure the safety of my friends.
And I have not yet described the cruelty that he is
practising over the whole earth.)
</p>

<p>
Ταῦτα ἔπεισέ με, ταῦτα ἐφάνη μοι δίκαια.
καὶ πρῶτον μὲν αὐτὰ τοῖς πάντα ὁρῶσι καὶ
ἀκούουσιν ἀνεθέμην θεοῖς. εἶτα θυσάμενος περὶ
τῆς ἐξόδου καὶ γενομένων καλῶν τῶν ἱερῶν κατ᾽
αὐτὴν ἐκείνην τὴν ἡμέραν, ἐν ᾗ τοῖς στρατιώταις
περὶ τῆς ἐπὶ τάδε πορείας [287] ἔμελλον διαλέγεσθαι,
ὑπέρ τε τῆς ἐμαυτοῦ σωτηρίας καὶ πολὺ πλέον
ὑπὲρ τῆς τῶν κοινῶν εὐπραγίας καὶ τῆς ἁπάντων
ἀνθρώπων ἐλευθερίας αὐτοῦ τε τοῦ Κελτῶν
ἔθνους, ὃ δὶς ἤδη τοῖς πολεμίοις ἐξέδωκεν, οὐδὲ
τῶν προγονικῶν φεισάμενος τάφων, ὁ τοὺς ἀλλοτρίους
πάνυ θεραπεύων, ᾠήθην δεῖν ἔθνη τε
προσλαβεῖν τὰ δυνατώτατα καὶ χρημάτων πόρους
δικαιοτάτων ἐξ ἀργυρείων καὶ χρυσείων, καὶ
εἰ μὲν ἀγαπήσειεν ἔτι νῦν γοῦν τὴν πρὸς ἡμᾶς
ὁμόνοιαν, εἴσω τῶν νῦν ἐχομένων μένειν, [B] εἰ δὲ
πολεμεῖν διανοοῖτο καὶ μηδὲν ἀπὸ τῆς προτέρας
γνώμης χαλάσειεν, ὅ, τι ἂν ᾖ τοῖς θεοῖς φίλον
πάσχειν ἢ πράττειν, ὡς αἴσχιον ἀνανδρίᾳ ψυχῆς
καὶ διανοίας ἀμαθίᾳ ἢ πλήθει δυνάμεως ἀσθενέστερον
αὐτοῦ φανῆναι. νῦν μὲν γὰρ εἰ τῷ πλήθει
κρατήσειεν, οὐκ ἐκείνου τὸ ἔργον, ἀλλὰ τῆς
πολυχειρίας ἐστίν· εἰ δὲ ἐν ταῖς Γαλλίαις
περιμένοντά με καὶ τὸ ζῆν ἀγαπῶντα καὶ
διακλίνοντα τὸν κίνδυνον [C] ἁπανταχόθεν περικόψας
<pb n='290'/><anchor id='Pg290'/><anchor id='Pg291'/>
κατέλαβε, κύκλῳ μὲν ὑπὸ τῶν βαρβάρων, κατὰ
στόμα δὲ ὑπὸ τῶν αὐτοῦ στρατοπέδων, τὸ
παθεῖν τε οἶμαι τὰ ἔσχατα προσῆν καὶ ἔτι ἡ
τῶν πραγμάτων αἰσχύνη οὐδεμιᾶς ἐλάττων ζημίας
τοῖς γε σώφροσι.
</p>

<p>
(These then were the events that persuaded me;
this was the conduct I thought just. And first I
imparted it to the gods who see and hear all things.
Then when I had offered sacrifices for my departure,
the omens were favourable on that very day
on which I was about to announce to the troops that
they were to march to this place; and since it was
not only on behalf of my own safety but far more for
the sake of the general welfare and the freedom of
all men and in particular of the people of Gaul,&mdash;for
twice already he had betrayed them to the enemy
and had not even spared the tombs of their ancestors,
he who is so anxious to conciliate strangers!&mdash;then, I
say, I thought that I ought to add to my forces
certain very powerful tribes and to obtain supplies of
money, which I had a perfect right to coin, both
gold and silver. Moreover if even now he would
welcome a reconciliation with me I would keep to
what I at present possess; but if he should decide
to go to war and will in no wise relent from his
earlier purpose, then I ought to do and to suffer whatever
is the will of the gods; seeing that it would be
more disgraceful to show myself his inferior through
failure of courage or lack of intelligence than in
mere numbers. For if he now defeats me by force
of numbers that will not be his doing, but will be due
to the larger army that he has at his command. If
on the other hand he had surprised me loitering in
Gaul and clinging to bare life and, while I tried to
avoid the danger, had attacked me on all sides, in
the rear and on the flanks by means of the barbarians,
and in front by his own legions, I should I believe
have had to face complete ruin, and moreover the
disgrace of such conduct is greater than any punishment&mdash;at
least in the sight of the wise.<note place='foot'>Demosthenes, <hi rend='italic'>Olynthiac</hi> 1. 27.</note>)
</p>

<p>
Ταῦτα διανοηθείς, ἄνδρες Ἀθηναῖοι, τοῖς τε
συστρατιώταις τοῖς ἐμοῖς διῆλθον καὶ πρὸς
κοινοὺς τῶν πάντων Ἑλλήνων πολίτας γράφω.
θεοὶ δὲ [D] οἱ πάντων κύριοι συμμαχίαν ἡμῖν τὴν
ἑαυτῶν, ὥσπερ ὑπέστησαν, εἰς τέλος δοῖεν καὶ
παράσχοιεν ταῖς Ἀθήναις ὑφ᾽ ἡμῶν τε εἰς ὅσον
δύναμις εὖ παθεῖν καὶ τοιούτους σχεῖν ἐς ἀεὶ
τοὺς αὐτοκράτορας, οἳ μάλιστα καὶ διαφερόντως
αὐτὰς αἰδέσονται<note place='foot'>αἰδέσονται Cobet, εἴσονται Hertlein, MSS.</note> καὶ ἀγαπήσουσιν.
</p>

<p>
(These then are the views, men of Athens, which I
have communicated to my fellow soldiers and which
I am now writing to the whole body of the citizens
throughout all Greece. May the gods who decide
all things vouchsafe me to the end the assistance
which they have promised, and may they grant to
Athens all possible favours at my hands! May she
always have such Emperors as will honour her and
love her above and beyond all other cities!)
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='295'/><anchor id='Pg295'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Fragment of a Letter to a Priest</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Introduction</head>

<p>
Julian was Supreme Pontiff, and as such felt responsible
for the teachings and conduct of the
priesthood. He saw that in order to offset the influence
of the Christian priests which he thought
was partly due to their moral teaching, partly to
their charity towards the poor, the pagans must
follow their example. Hitherto the preaching of
morals had been left to the philosophers. Julian's
admonitions as to the treatment of the poor and of
those in prison, and the rules that he lays down for
the private life of a priest are evidently borrowed
from the Christians.
</p>

<p>
This Fragment occurs in the Vossianus MS., inserted
in the Letter to Themistius,<note place='foot'>p. 256 <hi rend='smallcaps'>c</hi>, between τὸ δὴ λεγόμενον and καὶ πεποιήκασι.</note> and was identified
and published separately by Petavius. It was probably
written when Julian was at Antioch on the
way to Persia.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='296'/><anchor id='Pg296'/><anchor id='Pg297'/>

<div>

<p>
FRAGMENTUM EPISTOLAE
</p>

<p>
.... πλὴν ἢν εἰς τὸν βασιλέα ἐπίδωσιν
ἀτακτοῦντάς τινας, αὐτίκα μάλα κολάζουσιν· ἐπὶ
δὲ τοὺς οὐ προσιόντας τοῖς θεοῖς ἐστι τὸ τῶν
πονηρῶν δαιμόνων τεταγμένον φῦλον, [B] ὑφ᾽ ὧν οἱ
πολλοὶ παροιστρούμενοι τῶν ἀθέων ἀναπείθονται
θανατᾶν, ὡς ἀναπτησόμενοι πρὸς τὸν οὐρανόν,
ὅταν ἀπορρήξωσι τὴν ψυχὴν βιαίως. εἰσὶ δὲ οἳ
καὶ τὰς ἐρημίας ἀντὶ τῶν πόλεων διώκουσιν, ὄντος
τἀνθρώπου φύσει πολιτικοῦ ζῴου καὶ ἡμέρου,
δαίμοσιν ἐκδεδομένοι πονηροῖς, ὑφ᾽ ὧν εἰς ταύτην
ἄγονται τὴν μισανθρωπίαν. ἤδη δὲ καὶ δεσμὰ καὶ
κλοιοὺς ἐξηῦρον οἱ πολλοὶ τούτων· οὕτω πανταχόθεν
αὐτοὺς ὁ κακὸς συνελαύνει δαίμων, ᾧ
δεδώκασιν ἑκόντες ἑαυτούς, ἀποστάντες τῶν
ἀιδίων καὶ σωτήρων θεῶν. [C] ἀλλ᾽ ὑπὲρ μὲν τούτων
ἀπόχρη τοσαῦτα εἰπεῖν· ὅθεν δ᾽ ἐξέβην εἰς τοῦτο
ἐπανήξω.
</p>

<p>
(.... Only<note place='foot'>The beginning is lost: Julian has apparently been describing
the functions of good demons, and now passes on to
the demons whose task is to punish evil-doers; cf. <hi rend='italic'>Oration</hi>
2. 90 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b</hi>.</note> that they chastise, then and
there, any whom they see rebelling against their
king. And the tribe of evil demons is appointed to
punish those who do not worship the gods, and
stung to madness by them many atheists are induced
to court death in the belief that they will fly up
to heaven when they have brought their lives to a
violent end. Some men there are also who, though
man is naturally a social and civilised being, seek out
desert places instead of cities, since they have been
given over to evil demons and are led by them into
this hatred of their kind. And many of them have
even devised fetters and stocks to wear; to such a
degree does the evil demon to whom they have of
their own accord given themselves abet them in all
ways, after they have rebelled against the everlasting
and saving gods. But on this subject what I have
said is enough, and I will go back to the point at
which I digressed.)
</p>

<pb n='298'/><anchor id='Pg298'/><anchor id='Pg299'/>

<p>
Δικαιοπραγίας οὖν τῆς μὲν κατὰ τοὺς πολιτικοὺς
νόμους εὔδηλον ὅτι μελήσει τοῖς ἐπιτρόποις
τῶν πόλεων, πρέποι δ᾽ ἂν καὶ ὑμῖν εἰς παραίνεσιν
τὸ μὴ παραβαίνειν ἱεροὺς ὄντας τῶν θεῶν τοὺς
νόμους. [289] ἐπεὶ δὲ τὸν ἱερατικὸν βίον εἶναι χρὴ τοῦ
πολιτικοῦ σεμνότερον, ἀκτέον ἐπὶ τοῦτον καὶ
διδακτέον· ἕψονται δέ, ὡς εἰκός, οἱ βελτίους· ἐγὼ
μὲν γὰρ εὔχομαι καὶ πάντας, ἐλπίζω δὲ τοὺς
ἐπιεικεῖς φύσει καὶ σπουδαίους· ἐπιγνώσονται γὰρ
οἰκείους ὄντας ἑαυτοῖς τοὺς λόγους.
</p>

<p>
(Though just conduct in accordance with the laws
of the state will evidently be the concern of the
governors of cities, you in your turn will properly
take care to exhort men not to transgress the laws of
the gods, since those are sacred. Moreover, inasmuch
as the life of a priest ought to be more holy than the
political life, you must guide and instruct men to
adopt it. And the better sort will naturally follow
your guidance. Nay I pray that all men may, but
at any rate I hope that those who are naturally good
and upright will do so; for they will recognise that
your teachings are peculiarly adapted to them.)
</p>

<p>
Ἀσκητέα τοίνυν πρὸ πάντων ἡ φιλανθρωπία·
ταύτῃ γὰρ ἕπεται πολλὰ μὲν καὶ ἄλλα τῶν
ἀγαθῶν, [B] ἐξαίρετον δὲ δὴ καὶ μέγιστον ἡ παρὰ τῶν
θεῶν εὐμένεια. καθάπερ γὰρ οἱ τοῖς ἑαυτῶν
δεσπόταις συνδιατιθέμενοι περί τε φιλίας καὶ
σπουδὰς καὶ ἔρωτας ἀγαπῶνται πλέον τῶν
ὁμοδούλων, οὕτω νομιστέον φύσει φιλάνθρωπον
ὂν τὸ θεῖον ἀγαπᾶν τοὺς φιλανθρώπους τῶν
ἀνδρῶν. ἡ δὲ φιλανθρωπία πολλὴ καὶ παντοία·
[C] καὶ τὸ πεφεισμένως κολάζειν τοὺς ἀνθρώπους ἐπὶ
τῷ βελτίονι τῶν κολαζομένων, ὥσπερ οἱ διδάσκαλοι
τὰ παιδία, καὶ τὸ τὰς χρείας αὐτῶν
ἐπανορθοῦν, ὥσπερ οἱ θεοὶ τὰς ἡμετέρας. ὁρᾶτε
ὅσα ἡμῖν δεδώκασιν ἐκ τῆς γῆς ἀγαθά, τροφὰς
παντοίας καὶ ὁπόσας οὐδὲ ὁμοῦ πᾶσι τοῖς ζῴοις.
ἐπεὶ δὲ ἐτέχθημεν γυμνοί, ταῖς τε τῶν ζῴων ἡμᾶς
θριξὶν ἐσκέπασαν καὶ τοῖς ἐκ τῆς γῆς φυομένοις
καὶ τοῖς ἐκ δένδρων, καὶ οὐκ ἤρκεσεν ἁπλῶς οὐδὲ
αὐτοσχεδίως, [D] καθάπερ ὁ Μωυσῆς ἔφη τοὺς χιτῶνας
<pb n='300'/><anchor id='Pg300'/><anchor id='Pg301'/>
λαβεῖν δερματίνους, ἀλλ᾽ ὁρᾶτε ὅσα ἐγένετο
τῆς Ἐργάνης Ἀθηνᾶς τὰ δῶρα. ποῖον οἴνῳ
χρῆται ζῷον; ποῖον ἐλαίῳ; πλὴν εἴ τισιν ἡμεῖς
καὶ τούτων μεταδέδομεν, οἱ τοῖς ἀνθρώποις οὐ
μεταδιδόντες. τί δὲ τῶν θαλαττίων σίτῳ, τί δὲ
τῶν χερσαίων τοῖς ἐν τῇ θαλάττῃ χρῆται; χρυσὸν
οὔπω λέγω καὶ χαλκὸν καὶ σίδηρον, οἷς πᾶσιν οἱ
θεοὶ ζαπλούτους ἡμᾶς ἐποίησαν, οὐχ ἵνα ὄνειδος
αὐτῶν περιορῶμεν περινοστοῦντας τοὺς πένητας,
ἄλλως τε ὅταν [290] καὶ ἐπιεικεῖς τινες τύχωσι τὸν
τρόπον, οἷς πατρῷος μὲν κλῆρος οὐ γέγονεν, ὑπὸ
δὲ μεγαλοψυχίας ἥκιστα ἐπιθυμοῦντες χρημάτων
πένονται. τούτους ὁρῶντες οἱ πολλοὶ τοὺς θεοὺς
ὀνειδίζουσιν. αἴτιοι δὲ θεοὶ μὲν οὐκ εἰσὶ τῆς
τούτων πενίας, ἡ δὲ ἡμῶν τῶν κεκτημένων
ἀπληστία καὶ τοῖς ἀνθρώποις ὑπὲρ τῶν θεῶν οὐκ
ἀληθοῦς ὑπολήψεως αἰτία γίνεται καὶ προσέτι
τοῖς θεοῖς ὀνείδους ἀδίκου. [B] τί γὰρ ἀπαιτοῦμεν,
ἵνα χρυσὸν ὥσπερ τοῖς Ῥοδίοις ὁ θεὸς ὕσῃ τοῖς
πένησιν; ἀλλὰ εἰ καὶ τοῦτο γένοιτο, ταχέως ἡμεῖς
ὑποβαλόμενοι τοὺς οἰκέτας καὶ προθέντες πανταχοῦ
τὰ ἀγγεῖα πάντας ἀπελάσομεν, ἵνα μόνοι
τὰ κοινὰ τῶν θεῶν ἁρπάσωμεν δῶρα. θαυμάσειε
δ᾽ ἄν τις εἰκότως, εἰ τοῦτο μὲν ἀξιοῖμεν<note place='foot'>ἀξιοῖμεν Hertlein suggests, ἀξιοῦμεν MSS.</note> οὔτε
πεφυκὸς γίνεσθαι καὶ ἀλυσιτελὲς πάντη, τὰ
<pb n='302'/><anchor id='Pg302'/><anchor id='Pg303'/>
δυνατὰ δὲ μὴ πράττομεν. [C] τίς γὰρ ἐκ τοῦ μεταδιδόναι
τοῖς πέλας ἐγένετο πένης; ἐγώ τοι πολλάκις
τοῖς δεομένοις προέμενος ἐκτησάμην αὐτὰ παρὰ
θεῶν<note place='foot'>παρὰ θεῶν Hertlein suggests, παρ᾽ αὐτῶν MSS.</note> πολλαπλάσια καίπερ ὢν φαῦλος χρηματιστὴς,
καὶ οὐδέποτέ μοι μετεμέλησε προεμένῳ.
καὶ τὰ μὲν νῦν οὐκ ἂν εἴποιμι· καὶ γὰρ ἂν εἴη
παντελῶς ἄλογον, εἰ τοὺς ἰδιώτας ἀξιώσαιμι
βασιλικαῖς παραβάλλεσθαι χορηγίαις· [D] ἀλλ᾽ ὅτε
ἔτι ἐτύγχανον ἰδιώτης, σύνοιδα ἐμαυτῷ τοῦτο
ἀποβὰν πολλάκις. ἀπεσώθη μοι τέλειος ὁ κλῆρος
τῆς τήθης, ἐχόμενος ὑπ᾽ ἄλλων βιαίως ἐκ βραχέων
ὧν εἶχον ἀναλίσκοντι τοῖς δεομένοις καὶ μεταδιδόντι.
</p>

<p>
(You must above all exercise philanthropy, for
from it result many other blessings, and moreover
that choicest and greatest blessing of all, the good
will of the gods. For just as those who are in
agreement with their masters about their friendships
and ambitions and loves are more kindly treated
than their fellow slaves, so we must suppose that
God, who naturally loves human beings, has more
kindness for those men who love their fellows. Now
philanthropy has many divisions and is of many kinds.
For instance it is shown when men are punished in
moderation with a view to the betterment of those
punished, as schoolmasters punish children; and
again in ministering to men's needs, even as the
gods minister to our own. You see all the blessings
of the earth that they have granted to us, food
of all sorts, and in an abundance that they have not
granted to all other creatures put together. And
since we were born naked they covered us with the
hair of animals, and with things that grow in the
ground and on trees. Nor were they content to do
this simply or off-hand, as Moses tells us men took
coats of skins,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Genesis</hi> 3. 21.</note> but you see how numerous are the
gifts of Athene the Craftswoman. What other
animals use wine, or olive oil? Except indeed in
cases where we let them share in these things, even
though we do not share them with our fellowmen.
What creature of the sea uses corn, what land animal
uses things that grow in the sea? And I have not yet
mentioned gold and bronze and iron, though in all
these the the gods have made us very rich; yet not to
the end that we may bring reproach on them by
disregarding the poor who go about in our midst,
especially when they happen to be of good character&mdash;men
for instance who have inherited no paternal
estate, and are poor because in the greatness of their
souls they have no desire for money. Now the
crowd when they see such men blame the gods.
However it is not the gods who are to blame for their
poverty, but rather the insatiate greed of us men of
property becomes the cause of this false conception of
the gods among men, and besides of unjust blame of
the gods. Of what use, I ask, is it for us to pray that
God will rain gold on the poor as he did on the
people of Rhodes?<note place='foot'>Pindar, <hi rend='italic'>Olympian Ode</hi> 7. 49; this became a Sophistic
commonplace. Cf. Menander (Spengel) 3. 362; Aristides
1. 807; Libanius 31. 6, Foerster; Philostratus, <hi rend='bold'>Imagines</hi>
2. 270.</note> For even though this should
come to pass, we should forthwith set our slaves
underneath to catch it, and put out vessels everywhere,
and drive off all comers so that we alone might seize
upon the gifts of the gods meant for all in common.
And anyone would naturally think it strange if we
should ask for this, which is not in the nature of
things, and is in every way unprofitable, while we do
not do what is in our power. Who, I ask, ever became
poor by giving to his neighbours? Indeed I myself,
who have often given lavishly to those in need, have
recovered my gifts again many times over at the
hands of the gods, though I am a poor man of
business; nor have I ever repented of that lavish
giving. And of the present time I will say nothing,
for it would be altogether irrational of me to compare
the expenditure of private persons with that of
an Emperor; but when I was myself still a private
person I know that this happened to me many times.
My grandmother's estate for instance was kept for me
untouched, though others had taken possession of it
by violence, because from the little that I had I spent
money on those in need and gave them a share.)
</p>

<p>
Κοινωνητέον οὖν τῶν χρημάτων ἅπασιν ἀνθρώποις,
ἀλλὰ τοῖς μὲν ἐπιεικέσιν ἐλευθεριώτερον,
τοῖς δὲ ἀπόροις καὶ πένησιν ὅσον ἐπαρκέσαι τῇ
χρείᾳ. φαίνη δ᾽ ἄν, εἰ καὶ παράδοξον εἰπεῖν, ὅτι
καὶ τοῖς πονηροῖς<note place='foot'>πονηροῖς Hertlein suggests, πολεμίοις MSS.</note> ἐσθῆτος καὶ τροφῆς ὅσιον ἂν εἴη
μεταδιδόναι· [291] τῷ γὰρ ἀνθρωπίνῳ καὶ οὐ τῷ τρόπῳ
δίδομεν. διόπερ οἶμαι καὶ τοὺς ὲν δεσμωτηρίῳ
καθειργμένους ἀξιωτέον τῆς τοιαύτης ἐπιμελείας.
οὐδὲν γὰρ κωλύσει τὴν δίκην ἡ τοιαύτη φιλανθρωπία.
χαλεπὸν γὰρ ἂν εἴη, πολλῶν ἀποκεκλεισμένων
ἐπὶ κρίσει, καὶ τῶν μὲν ὀφλησόντων,
τῶν δὲ ἀθῴων ἀποφανθησομένων, μὴ διὰ τοὺς
ἀναιτίους οἶκτόν τινα νέμειν καὶ τοῖς πονηροὶς,
ἀλλὰ τῶν πονηρῶν [B] ἕνεκα καὶ περὶ τοὺς οὐδὲν
ἠδικηκότας ἀνηλεῶς καὶ ἀπανθρώπως διακεῖσθαι.
<pb n='304'/><anchor id='Pg304'/><anchor id='Pg305'/>
ἐκεῖνο δὲ ἐννοοῦντί μοι παντάπασιν ἄδικον καταφαίνεται·
Ξένιον ὀνομάζομεν Δία, καὶ γιγνόμεθα
τῶν Σκυθῶν κακοξενώτεροι. πῶς οὖν ὁ βουλόμενος
τῷ Ξενίῳ θῦσαι Διὶ φοιτᾷ πρὸς τὸν νεών;
μετὰ ποταποῦ συνειδότος, ἐπιλαθόμενος τοῦ
</p>

<p>
(We ought then to share our money with all men,
but more generously with the good, and with the
helpless and poor so as to suffice for their need.
And I will assert, even though it be paradoxical to
say so, that it would be a pious act to share our
clothes and food even with the wicked. For it is to
the humanity in a man that we give, and not to his
moral character. Hence I think that even those
who are shut up in prison have a right to the same
sort of care; since this kind of philanthropy will not
hinder justice. For when many have been shut up
in prison to await trial, of whom some will be found
guilty, while others will prove to be innocent, it
would be harsh indeed if out of regard for the guiltless
we should not bestow some pity on the guilty
also, or again, if on account of the guilty we should
behave ruthlessly and inhumanly to those also who
have done no wrong. This too, when I consider it,
seems to me altogether wrong; I mean that we call
Zeus by the title <q>God of Strangers,</q> while we show
ourselves more inhospitable to strangers than are
the very Scythians. How, I ask, can one who wishes
to sacrifice to Zeus, the God of Strangers, even
approach his temple? With what conscience can he
do so, when he has forgotten the saying)
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 12'>πρὸς γὰρ Διός εἰσιν ἅπαντες</l>
<l>Πτωχοί τε ξεῖνοί τε· δόσις δ᾽ ὀλίγη τε φίλη τε;</l>
</lg>

<p>
(<q>From Zeus
come all beggars and strangers; and a gift is precious
though small</q>?<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Odyssey</hi> 6. 207.</note>)
</p>

</quote>

<p>
[C] Πῶς δὲ ὁ τὸν Ἑταίρειον θεραπεύων Δία, ὁρῶν
τοὺς πέλας ἐνδεεῖς χρημάτων, εἶτα μηδ᾽ ὅσον
δραχμῆς μεταδιδούς, οἴεται τὸν Δία καλῶς θεραπεύειν;
ὅταν εἰς ταῦτα ἀπίδω, παντελῶς ἀχανὴς
γίνομαι, τὰς μὲν ἐπωνυμίας τῶν θεῶν ἅμα τῷ
κόσμῳ τῷ ἐξ ἀρχῆς ὥσπερ εἰκόνας γραπτὰς ὁρῶν,
ἔργῳ δὲ ὑφ᾽ ἡμῶν οὐδὲν τοιοῦτον ἐπιτηδευόμενον.
ὁμόγνιοι λέγονται [D] παρ᾽ ἡμῖν θεοὶ καὶ Ζεὺς ὁμόγνιος,
ἔχομεν δὲ ὥσπερ πρὸς ἀλλοτρίους τοὺς
συγγενεῖς· ἄνθρωπος γὰρ ἀνθρώπῳ καὶ ἑκὼν καὶ
ἄκων πᾶς ἐστι συγγενής, εἴτε, καθάπερ λέγεται
παρά τινων, ἐξ ἑνός τε καὶ μιᾶς γενόναμεν πάντες,
εἴθ᾽ ὁπωσοῦν ἄλλως, ἀθρόως ὑποστησάντων ἡμᾶς
τῶν θεῶν ἅμα τῷ κόσμῳ τῷ ἐξ ἀρχῆς, οὐχ ἕνα καὶ
μίαν, ἀλλὰ πολλοὺς ἅμα καὶ πολλάς. [292] οἱ γὰρ ἕνα
καὶ μίαν δυνηθέντες οἷοί τε ἦσαν ἅμα καὶ πολλοὺς
καὶ πολλὰς ὑποστῆσαι.<note place='foot'>ὑποστῆσαι Reiske would add.</note> καὶ γὰρ ὃν τρόπον τόν
τε ἕνα καὶ τὴν μίαν, τὸν αὐτὸν τρόπον τοὺς
πολλούς τε καὶ τὰς πολλάς. εἴς τε τὸ διάφορον
<pb n='306'/><anchor id='Pg306'/><anchor id='Pg307'/>
ἀποβλέψαντα τῶν ἐθῶν<note place='foot'>ἐθῶν Hertlein suggests, ἀγαθῶν Petavius, ἠθῶν MSS.</note> καὶ τῶν νόμων, οὐ μὴν
ἀλλὰ καὶ ὅπερ ἐστὶ μεῖζων καὶ τιμιώτερον καὶ
κυριώτερον, εἰς τὴν τῶν θεῶν φήμην, ἣ παραδέδοται
διὰ τῶν ἀρχαίων ἡμῖν θεουργῶν, [B] ὡς ὅτε Ζεὺς
ἐκόσμει τὰ πάντα, σταγόνων αἵματος ἱεροῦ πεσουσῶν,
ἐξ ὧν που τὸ τῶν ἀνθρώπων βλαστήσειε
γένος. καὶ οὕτως οὖν συγγενεῖς γινόμεθα πάντες,
εἰ μὲν ἐξ ἑνὸς καὶ μιᾶς, ἐκ δυοῖν ἀνθρώποιν ὄντες
οἱ πολλοὶ καὶ πολλαὶ, εἰ δέ, καθάπερ οἱ θεοί
φασι καὶ χρὴ πιστεύειν ἐπιμαρτυρούντων τῶν
ἔργων, ἐκ τῶν θεῶν πάντες γεγονότες. ὅτι δὲ
πολλοὺς ἅμα ἀνθρώπους [C] γενέσθαι μαρτυρεῖ τὰ
ἔργα, ῥηθήσεται μὲν ἀλλαχοῦ δι᾽ ἀκριβείας,
ἐνταῦθα δὲ ἀρκέσει τοσοῦτον εἰπεῖν, ὡς ἐξ ἑνὸς
μὲν καὶ μιᾶς οὖσιν οὔτε τοὺς νόμους εἰκὸς ἐπὶ
τοσοῦτον παραλλάξαι οὔτε ἄλλως τὴν γῆν ὑφ᾽ ἑνὸς
ἐμπλησθῆναι πᾶσαν, οὐδὲ εἰ τέκνα<note place='foot'>τέκνα Hertlein would add.</note> ἅμα πολλὰ
καθάπερ αἱ σύες ἔτικτον αὐτοῖς αἱ γυναῖκες.
πανταχοῦ δὲ ἀθρόως φυτευσάντων τῶν<note place='foot'>φυτευσάντων τῶν Hertlein suggests, νευσάντων MSS.</note> θεῶν,
ὅνπερ τρόπον ὁ εἷς, οὕτω δὲ καὶ οἱ πλείους προῆλθον
ἄνθρωποι τοῖς γενεάρχαις θεοῖς ἀποκληρωθέντες,
οἳ καὶ προήγαγον αὐτούς, [D] ἀπὸ τοῦ δημιουργοῦ
τὰς ψυχὰς παραλαμβάνοντες ἐξ αἰῶνος.
</p>

<p>
(Again, the man who worships Zeus the God of
Comrades, and who, though he sees his neighbours
in need of money, does not give them even so much
as a drachma, how, I say, can he think that he is
worshipping Zeus aright? When I observe this I
am wholly amazed, since I see that these titles of the
gods are from the beginning of the world their express
images, yet in our practice we pay no attention
to anything of the sort. The gods are called by us
<q>gods of kindred,</q> and Zeus the <q>God of Kindred,</q>
but we treat our kinsmen as though they were
strangers. I say <q>kinsmen</q> because every man,
whether he will or no, is akin to every other man,
whether it be true, as some say, that we are all descended
from one man and one woman, or whether it
came about in some other way, and the gods created
us all together, at the first when the world began, not
one man and one woman only, but many men and
many women at once. For they who had the power to
create one man and one woman, were able to create
many men and women at once; since the manner of
creating one man and one woman is the same as that
of creating many men and many women. And<note place='foot'>The connection of the thought is not clear, and Petavius
thinks that something has been lost.</note>
one must have regard to the differences in our
habits and laws, or still more to that which is higher
and more precious and more authoritative, I mean
the sacred tradition of the gods which has been
handed down to us by the theurgists of earlier days,
namely that when Zeus was setting all things in
order there fell from him drops of sacred blood, and
from them, as they say, arose the race of men. It
follows therefore that we are all kinsmen, whether,
many men and women as we are, we come from two
human beings, or whether, as the gods tell us, and
as we ought to believe, since facts bear witness
thereto, we are all descended from the gods. And
that facts bear witness that many men came into the
world at once, I shall maintain elsewhere, and
precisely, but for the moment it will be enough to
say this much, that if we were descended from one
man and one woman, it is not likely that our laws
would show such great divergence; nor in any case
is it likely that the whole earth was filled with
people by one man; nay, not even if the women used
to bear many children at a time to their husbands,
like swine. But when the gods all together had
given birth to men, just as one man came forth, so
in like manner came forth many men who had been
allotted to the gods who rule over births; and they
brought them forth, receiving their souls from the
Demiurge from eternity.<note place='foot'>Julian here prefers the Platonic account of the creation
in the <hi rend='italic'>Timaeus</hi> to the Biblical narrative.</note>)
</p>

<p>
Κἀκεῖνο δ᾽ ἄξιον ἐννοεῖν, ὅσοι παρὰ τῶν ἔμπροσθεν
ἀνάλωνται λόγοι περὶ τοῦ φύσει κοινωνικὸν
εἶναι ζῷον τὸν ἄνθρωπον, ἡμεῖς οὖν οἱ ταῦτα
εἰπόντες καὶ διατάξαντες ἀκοινωνήτως πρὸς τοὺς
<pb n='308'/><anchor id='Pg308'/><anchor id='Pg309'/>
πλησίον ἕξομεν; ἐκ δὴ τῶν τοιούτων ἠθῶν τε καὶ
ἐπιτηδευμάτων ἕκαστος ἡμῶν ὁρμώμενος εὐλαβείας
τῆς εἰς τοὺς θεούς, [293] χρηστότητος τῆς εἰς ἀνθρώπους,
ἁγνείας τῆς περὶ τὸ σῶμα, τὰ τῆς εὐσεβείας ἔργα
πληρούτω, πειρώμενος δὲ ἀεί τι περὶ τῶν θεῶν
εὐσεβὲς διανοεῖσθαι καὶ μετά τινος ἀποβλέπων
εἰς τὰ ἱερὰ τῶν θεῶν καὶ τὰ ἀγάλματα τιμῆς καὶ
ὁσιότητος, σεβόμενος ὥσπερ ἂν εἰ παρόντας ἑώρα
τοὺς θεούς. ἀγάλματα γὰρ καὶ βωμοὺς καὶ πυρὸς
ἀσβέστου φυλακὴν καὶ πάντα ἁπλῶς τὰ τοιαῦτα
σύμβολα οἱ πατέρες ἔθεντο τῆς παρουσίας τῶν
θεῶν, [B] οὐχ ἵνα ἐκεῖνα θεοὺς νομίσωμεν, ἀλλ᾽ ἵνα
δι᾽ αὐτῶν τοὺς θεοὺς θεραπεύσωμεν. ἐπειδὴ γὰρ
ἡμᾶς ὄντας ἐν σώματι σωματικῶς<note place='foot'>σωματικῶς Petavius, Hertlein approves, σωματικὰς MSS.</note> ἔδει ποιεῖσθαι
τοῖς θεοῖς καὶ τὰς λατρείας, ἀσώματοι δέ εἰσιν
αὐτοί· πρῶτα μὲν ἔδειξαν ἡμῖν ἀγάλματα τὸ
δεύτερον ἀπὸ τοῦ πρώτου τῶν θεῶν γένος περὶ
πάντα τὸν οὐρανὸν κύκλῳ περιφερόμενον. [C] δυναμένης
δὲ οὐδὲ τούτοις ἀποδίδοσθαι τῆς θεραπείας
σωματικῶς· ἀπροσδεᾶ γάρ ἐστι φύσει· ἕτερον<note place='foot'>ἕτερον Hertlein suggests, δεύτερον Reiske, τρίτον MSS.</note>
ἐπὶ γῆς ἐξηυρέθη γένος ἀγαλμάτων, εἰς ὃ τὰς
θεραπείας ἐκτελοῦντες ἑαυτοῖς εὐμενεῖς τοὺς
θεοὺς καταστήσομεν. ὥσπερ γὰρ οἱ τῶν βασιλέων
θεραπεύοντες εἰκόνας, οὐδὲν δεομένων, ὅμως
ἐφέλκονται τὴν εὔνοιαν εἰς ἑαυτούς, οὕτων καὶ οἱ
θεῶν θεραπεύοντες τὰ ἀγάλματα, [D] δεομένων οὐδὲν
τῶν θεῶν, ὅμως πείθουσιν αὐτοὺς ἐπαμύνειν σφίσι
<pb n='310'/><anchor id='Pg310'/><anchor id='Pg311'/>
καὶ κήδεσθαι· δεῖγμα γάρ ἐστιν ὡς ἀληθῶς
ὁσιότητος ἡ περὶ τὰ δυνατὰ προθυμία, καὶ ὁ
ταύτην πληρῶν εὔδηλον ὅτι μειζόνως ἐκείνην
ἀποδίδωσιν, ὁ δὲ τῶν δυνατῶν ὀλιγωρῶν, εἶτα
προσποιούμενος τῶν ἀδυνάτων ὀρέγεσθαι δῆλός
ἐστιν [294] οὐκ ἐκεῖνα μεταδιώκων, ἀλλὰ ταῦτα παρορῶν·
οὐδὲ γάρ, εἰ μηδενὸς ὁ θεὸς δεῖται, διὰ τοῦτο
οὐδὲν αὐτῷ προσοιστέον· οὐδὲ γὰρ τῆς διὰ λόγων
εὐφημίας δεῖται. τί οὖν; εὔλογον αὐτὸν ἀποστερῆσαι
καὶ ταύτης; [B] οὐδαμῶς. οὐκ ἄρα οὐδὲ
τῆς διὰ τῶν ἔργων εἰς αὐτὸν γιγνομένης τιμῆς, ἧς
ἐνομοθέτησαν οὐκ ἐνιαυτοὶ τρεῖς οὐδὲ τρισχίλιοι,
πᾶς δὲ ὁ προλαβὼν αἰὼν ἐν πᾶσι τοῖς τῆς γῆς
ἔθνεσιν.
</p>

<p>
(It is proper also to bear in mind how many discourses
have been devoted by men in the past to
show that man is by nature a social animal. And
shall we, after, asserting this and enjoining it, bear
ourselves unsociably to our neighbours? Then let
everyone make the basis of his conduct moral
virtues, and actions like these, namely reverence
towards the gods, benevolence towards men, personal
chastity; and thus let him abound in pious
acts, I mean by endeavouring always to have pious
thoughts about the gods, and by regarding the
temples and images of the gods with due honour
and veneration, and by worshipping the gods as
though he saw them actually present. For our
fathers established images and altars, and the maintenance
of undying fire, and, generally speaking,
everything of the sort, as symbols of the presence
of the gods, not that we may regard such things as
gods, but that we may worship the gods through
them. For since being in the body it was in bodily
wise that we must needs perform our service to the
gods also, though they are themselves without bodies;
they therefore revealed to us in the earliest images
the class of gods next in rank to the first, even
those that revolve in a circle about the whole
heavens. But since not even to these can due
worship be offered in bodily wise&mdash;for they are by
nature not in need of anything<note place='foot'>cf. St. Paul, <hi rend='italic'>Acts</hi> 17. 25, <q>neither is he worshipped with
men's hands, as though he needed anything.</q></note>&mdash;another class of
images was invented on the earth, and by performing
our worship to them we shall make the gods propitious
to ourselves. For just as those who make offerings
to the statues of the emperors, who are in need of
nothing, nevertheless induce goodwill towards themselves
thereby, so too those who make offerings to the
images of the gods, though the gods need nothing,
do nevertheless thereby persuade them to help and
to care for them. For zeal to do all that is in one's
power is, in truth, a proof of piety, and it is evident
that he who abounds in such zeal thereby displays
a higher degree of piety; whereas he who neglects
what is possible, and then pretends to aim at
what is impossible, evidently does not strive after
the impossible, since he overlooks the possible. For
even though God stands in need of nothing, it does
not follow that on that account nothing ought to be
offered to him. He does not need the reverence
that is paid in words. What then? Is it rational
to deprive him of this also? By no means. It follows
then that one ought not to deprive him either
of the honour that is paid to him through deeds, an
honour which not three years or three thousand
years have ordained, but all past time among all the
nations of the earth.)
</p>

<p>
[C] Ἀφορῶντες οὖν εἰς τὰ τῶν θεῶν ἀγάλματα μή
τοι νομίζωμεν αὐτὰ λίθους εἶναι μηδὲ ξύλα, μηδὲ
μέντοι τοὺς θεοὺς αὐτοὺς εἶναι ταῦτα. καὶ γὰρ
οὐδὲ τὰς βασιλικὰς εἰκόνας ξύλα καὶ λίθον καὶ
χαλκὸν λέγομεν, οὐ μὴν οὐδὲ αὐτοὺς τοὺς βασιλέας,
ἀλλὰ εἰκόνας βασιλέων. ὅστις οὖν ἐστι
φιλοβασιλεὺς ἡδέως ὁρᾷ τὴν τοῦ βασιλέως εἰκόνα,
καὶ ὅστις ἐστὶ [D] φιλόπαις ἡδέως ὁρᾷ τὴν τοῦ
παιδός, καὶ ὅστις φιλοπάτωρ τὴν τοῦ πατρός.
οὐκοῦν καὶ ὅστις φιλόθεος ἡδέως εἰς τὰ τῶν θεῶν
ἀγάλματα καὶ τὰς εἰκόνας ἀποβλέπει, σεβόμενος
ἅμα καὶ φρίττων ἐξ ἀφανοῦς ὁρῶντας εἰς αὐτὸν
τοὺς θεούς. εἴ τις οὖν οἴεται δεῖν αὐτὰ μηδὲ
φθείρεσθαι διὰ τὸ θεῶν ἅπαξ εἰκόνας κληθῆναι,
<pb n='312'/><anchor id='Pg312'/><anchor id='Pg313'/>
παντελῶς ἄφρων εἶναί μοι φαίνεται. χρῆν γὰρ
δήπουθεν αὐτὰ μηδὲ [295] ὑπὸ ἀνθρώπων γενέσθαι. τὸ
δὲ ὑπ᾽ ἀνδρὸς σοφοῦ καὶ ἀγαθοῦ γενόμενον ὑπὸ ἀνθρώπου
πονηροῦ καὶ ἀμαθοῦς φθαρῆναι δύναται.
τὰ δὲ ὑπὸ τῶν θεῶν ζῶντα ἀγάλματα κατασκευασθέντα
τῆς ἀφανοῦς αὐτῶν οὐσίας, οἱ περὶ τὸν
οὐρανὸν κύκλῳ φερόμενοι θεοί, μένει τὸν ἀεὶ
χρόνον ἀίδια. μηδεὶς οὖν ἀπιστείτω θεοῖς ὁρῶν
καὶ ἀκούων, ὡς ἐνύβρισάν τινες εἰς τὰ ἀγάλματα
καὶ τοὺς ναούς. ἆρ᾽ οὐκ ἀνθρώπους χρηστοὺς
ἀπέκτειναν πολλοί, [B] καθάπερ Σωκράτη καὶ Δίωνα
καὶ τὸν μέγαν Ἐμπεδότιμον; ὧν εὖ οἶδ᾽ ὅτι μᾶλλον
ἐμέλησε τοῖς θεοῖς. ἀλλ᾽ ὁρᾶτε, ὅτι καὶ τούτων
φθαρτὸν εἰδότες τὸ σῶμα συνεχώρησαν εἶξαι τῇ
φύσει καὶ ὑποχωρῆσαι, δίκην δὲ ἀπῄτησαν
ὕστερον παρὰ τῶν κτεινάντων. ὃ δὴ συνέβη
φανερῶς ἐφ᾽ ἡμῶν ἐπὶ πάντων τῶν ἱεροσύλων.
</p>

<p>
(Therefore, when we look at the images of the
gods, let us not indeed think they are stones or
wood, but neither let us think they are the gods
themselves; and indeed we do not say that the
statues of the emperors are mere wood and stone
and bronze, but still less do we say they are the
emperors themselves. He therefore who loves the
emperor delights to see the emperor's statue, and he
who loves his son delights to see his son's statue,
and he who loves his father delights to see his
father's statue. It follows that he who loves the gods
delights to gaze on the images of the gods, and
their likenesses, and he feels reverence and shudders
with awe of the gods who look at him from the
unseen world. Therefore if any man thinks that
because they have once been called likenesses of the
gods, they are incapable of being destroyed, he is, it
seems to me, altogether foolish; for surely in that
case they were incapable of being made by men's
hands. But what has been made by a wise and good
man can be destroyed by a bad and ignorant man.
But those beings which were fashioned by the gods as
the living images of their invisible nature, I mean
the gods who revolve in a circle in the heavens,
abide imperishable for all time. Therefore let no
man disbelieve in gods because he sees and hears
that certain persons have profaned their images and
temples. Have they not in many cases put good
men to death, like Socrates and Dio and the great
Empedotimus?<note place='foot'>Of Syracuse, whose claim to be immortal was accepted
by the Sicilians.</note> And yet I am very sure that the
gods cared more for these men than for the temples.
But observe that since they knew that the bodies even
of these men were destructible, they allowed them to
yield to nature and to submit, but later on they
exacted punishment from their slayers; and this has
happened in the sight of all, in our own day also, in
the case of all who have profaned the temples.)
</p>

<p>
Μηδεὶς οὖν ἀπατάτω λόγοις μηδὲ ταραττέτω
περὶ τῆς προνοίας ἡμᾶς. [C] οἱ γὰρ ἡμῖν ὀνειδίζοντες
τὰ τοιαῦτα, τῶν Ἰουδαίων οἱ προφῆται, τί περὶ
τοῦ νεὼ φήσουσι τοῦ παρ᾽ αὐτοῖς τρίτον ἀνατραπέντος,
ἐγειρομένου δὲ οὐδὲ νῦν; ἐγὼ δὲ εἶπον οὐκ
ὀνειδίζων ἐκείνοις, ὅς γε τοσούτοις ὕστερον χρόνοις
ἀναστήσασθαι διενοήθην αὐτὸν εἰς τιμὴν τοῦ
κληθέντος ἐπ᾽ αὐτῷ θεοῦ· νυνὶ δὲ ἐχρησάμην
αὐτῷ δεῖξαι βουλόμενος, [D] ὅτι τῶν ἀνθρωπίνων
οὐδὲν ἄφθαρτον εἶναι δύναται καὶ οἱ τὰ τοιαῦτα
<pb n='314'/><anchor id='Pg314'/><anchor id='Pg315'/>
γράφοντες ἐλήρουν προφῆται, γρᾳδίοις ψυχροῖς
ὁμιλοῦντεσ. οὐδὲν δὲ οἶμαι κωλύει τὸν μὲν
θεὸν εἶναι μέγαν, οὐ μὴν σπουδαίων προφητῶν
οὐδὲ ἐξηγητῶν τυχεῖν. αἴτιον δέ, ὅτι τὴν ἑαυτῶν
ψυχὴν οὐ παρέσχον ἀποκαθῆραι τοῖς ἐγκυκλίοις
μαθήμασιν οὐδὲ ἀνοῖξαι μεμυκότα λίαν τὰ ὄμματα
οὐδὲ ἀνακαθῆραι [296] τὴν ἐπικειμένην αὐτοῖς ἀχλύν,
ἀλλ᾽ οἷον φῶς μέγα δι᾽ ὁμίχλης οἱ ἄνθρωποι βλέποντες
οὐ καθαρῶς οὐδὲ εἰλικρινῶς, αὐτὸ δὲ
ἐκεῖνο νενομικότες οὐχὶ φῶς καθαρόν, ἀλλὰ πῦρ
καὶ τῶν περὶ αὐτὸ πάντων ὄντες ἀθέατοι βοῶσι
μέγα· Φρίττετε, φοβεῖσθε, πῦρ, φλόξ, θάνατος,
μάχαιρα, ῥομφαία, πολλοῖς ὀνόμασι μίαν ἐξηγούμενοι
τὴν βλαπτικὴν τοῦ πυρὸς δύναμιν. ἀλλ᾽
ὑπὲρ μὲν τούτων ἰδίᾳ βέλτιον παραστῆσαι, [B] πόσῳ
φαυλότεροι τῶν παρ᾽ ἡμῖν οὗτοι γεγόνασι ποιητῶν
οἱ τῶν ὑπὲρ τοῦ θεοῦ λόγων διδάσκαλοι.
</p>

<p>
(Therefore let no man deceive us with his sayings
or trouble our faith in a divine providence. For as for
those who make such profanation a reproach against
us, I mean the prophets of the Jews, what have they
to say about their own temple, which was overthrown
three times and even now is not being raised up
again? This I mention not as a reproach against
them, for I myself, after so great a lapse of time,
intended to restore it, in honour of the god whose
name has been associated with it. But in the
present case I have used this instance because I wish
to prove that nothing made by man can be indestructible
and that those prophets who wrote such
statements were uttering nonsense, due to their
gossiping with silly old women. In my opinion
there is no reason why their god should not be
a mighty god, even though he does not happen to
have wise prophets or interpreters. But the real
reason why they are not wise is that they have not
submitted their souls to be cleansed by the regular
course of study, nor have they allowed those studies
to open their tightly closed eyes, and to clear away
the mist that hangs over them. But since these
men see as it were a great light through a fog, not
plainly or clearly, and since they think that what
they see is not a pure light but a fire, and they fail
to discern all that surrounds it, they cry with a loud
voice: <q>Tremble, be afraid, fire, flame, death, a
dagger, a broad-sword!</q> thus describing under many
names the harmful might of fire. But on this subject
it will be better to demonstrate separately how
much inferior to our own poets are these teachers of
tales about the gods.)
</p>

<p>
Προσήκει δὲ οῦ τὰ τῶν θεῶν μόνον ἀγάλματα
προσκυνεῖν, ἀλλὰ καὶ τοὺς ναοὺς καὶ τὰ τεμένη
καὶ τοὺς βωμούς· εὔλογον δὲ καὶ τοὺς ἱερέας
τιμᾶν ὡς λειτουργοὺς θεῶν καὶ ὑπηρέτας καὶ
διακονοῦντας ἡμῖν τὰ πρὸς τοὺς θεούς, συνεπισχύοντας
τῇ ἐκ θεῶν [C] εἰς ἡμᾶς τῶν ἀγαθῶν δόσει·
προθύουσι γὰρ πάντων καὶ ὑπερεύχονται. δίκαιον
οὖν ἀποδιδόναι πᾶσιν αὐτοῖς οὐκ ἔλαττον,
εἰ μὴ καὶ πλέον, ἢ τοῖς πολιτικοῖς ἄρχουσι τὰς
τιμάς. εἰ δέ τις οἴεται τοῦτο ἐπ᾽ ἴσης χρῆναι
νέμειν αὐτοῖς καὶ τοῖς πολιτικοῖς ἄρχουσιν, ἐπεὶ
<pb n='316'/><anchor id='Pg316'/><anchor id='Pg317'/>
κἀκεῖνοι τρόπον τινὰ τοῖς θεοῖς ἱερατεύουσι,
φύλακες ὄντες τῶν νόμων, ἀλλὰ τά γε τῆς εὐνοίας
παρὰ πολὺ χρὴ νέμειν τούτοις. [D] οἱ μὲν γὰρ
Ἀχαιοὶ καίπερ πολέμιον ὄντα τὸν ἱερέα προσέταττον
αἰδεῖσθαι τῷ βασιλεῖ· ἡμεῖς δὲ οὐδὲ
τοὺς φίλους αἰδούμεθα τοὺς εὐχομένους ὑπὲρ
ἡμῶν καὶ θύοντας.
</p>

<p>
(It is our duty to adore not only the images of the
gods, but also their temples and sacred precincts and
altars. And it is reasonable to honour the priests
also as officials and servants of the gods; and because
they minister to us what concerns the gods, and they
lend strength to the gods' gift of good things to us;
for they sacrifice and pray on behalf of all men. It
is therefore right that we should pay them all not
less, if not indeed more, than the honours that we
pay to the magistrates of the state. And if any one
thinks that we ought to assign equal honours to them
and to the magistrates of the state, since the latter
also are in some sort dedicated to the service of the
gods, as being guardians of the laws, nevertheless we
ought at any rate to give the priests a far greater
share of our good will. The Achaeans, for instance,
enjoined on their king<note place='foot'>Agamemnon; <hi rend='italic'>Iliad</hi> 1. 23.</note> to reverence the priest,
though he was one of the enemy, whereas we do not
even reverence the priests who are our friends, and
who pray and sacrifice on our behalf.)
</p>

<p>
Ἀλλ᾽ ἐπείπερ ὁ λόγος εἰς τὴν πάλαι ποθουμένην
ἀρχὴν ἐλήλυθεν, ἄξιον εἶναί μοι δοκεῖ διελθεῖν
ἐφεξῆς, ὁποῖός τις ὢν ὁ ἱερεὺς αὐτός τε
δικαίως τιμηθήσεται καὶ τοὺς θεοὺς τιμᾶσθαι
ποιήσει.<note place='foot'>καὶ&mdash;ποιήσει Hertlein suggests, lacuna MSS.</note> τὸ γὰρ ἡμέτερον οὐ χρὴ σκοπεῖν οὐδὲ
ἐξετάζειν, [297] ἀλλὰ ἕως ἂν ἱερεύς τις ὀνομάζηται,
τιμᾶν αὐτὸν χρὴ καὶ θεραπεύειν, εἰ δὲ εἴη πονηρός,
ἀφαιρεθέντα τὴν ἱερωσύνην ὡς ἀνάξιον ἀποφανθέντα
περιορᾶν· ἕως δὲ προθύει καὶ κατάρχεται καὶ
παρίσταται τοῖς θεοῖς, ὡς τὸ τιμιώτατον τῶν θεῶν
κτῆμα προσβλεπτέος ἐστὶν ἡμῖν μετὰ αἰδοῦς καὶ
εὐλαβείας. ἄτοπον γάρ, εἰ τοὺς μὲν λίθους, ἐξ ὧν οἱ
βωμοὶ πεποίηνται, διὰ τὸ καθιερῶσθαι τοῖς θεοῖς
ἀγαπῶμεν,<note place='foot'>ἀγαπῶμεν Hertlein suggests, ἀγαπήσομεν MSS.</note> ὅτι μορφὴν ἔχουσι καὶ σχῆμα πρέπον,
εἰς [B] ἥν εἰσι κατεσκευασμένοι λειτουργίαν,
ἄνδρα δὲ καθωσιωμένον τοῖς θεοῖς οὐκ οἰησόμεθα
χρῆναι τιμᾶν. ἴσως ὑπολήψεταί τις· ἀλλὰ
ἀδικοῦντα καὶ ἐξαμαρτάνοντα πολλὰ τῶν πρὸς
<pb n='318'/><anchor id='Pg318'/><anchor id='Pg319'/>
τοὺς θεοὺς ὁσίων; ἐγὼ δή φημι χρῆναι τὸν μὲν
τοιοῦτον ἐξελέγχειν, ἵνα μὴ πονηρὸς ὢν ἐνοχλῇ
τοὺς θεούς, ἕως δ᾽ ἂν ἐξελέγξῃ<note place='foot'>ἐξελέγξῃ Hertlein suggests, ἐξελέγχῃ MSS.</note> τις, μὴ ἀτιμάζειν.
οὐδὲ γὰρ [C] εὔλογον ἐπιλαβομένους ταύτης τῆς
ἀφορμῆς οὐ τούτων μόνον, ἀλλὰ καὶ τῶν ἐπιτηδείων
τιμᾶσθαι τὴν τιμὴν προσαφαιρεῖσθαι. ἔστω
τοίνυν ὥσπερ ἄρχων, οὕτω δὲ καὶ ἱερεὺς πᾶς
αἰδέσιμος, ἐπειδὴ καὶ ἀπόφασίς ἐστι θεοῦ τοῦ
Διδυμαίου τοιαύτη·
</p>

<p>
(But since my discourse has come back again to
the beginning as I have so long wished, I think it
is worth while for me to describe next in order
what sort of man a priest ought to be, in order that
he may justly be honoured himself and may cause
the gods to be honoured. For as for us, we ought
not to investigate or enquire as to his conduct,
but so long as a man is called a priest we ought to
honour and cherish him, but if he prove to be
wicked we ought to allow his priestly office to be
taken away from him, since he has shown himself
unworthy of it. But so long as he sacrifices for us
and makes offerings and stands in the presence of
the gods, we must regard him with respect and
reverence as the most highly honoured chattel<note place='foot'>cf. Plato, <hi rend='italic'>Phaedo</hi> 62 <hi rend='smallcaps'>c</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>Letter to the Athenians</hi> 276 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b</hi>.</note> of
the gods. For it would be absurd for us to pay
respect to the very stones of which the altars are
made, on account of their being dedicated to the
gods, because they have a certain shape and form
suited to the ritual for which they have been
fashioned, and then not to think that we ought to
honour a man who has been dedicated to the gods.
Perhaps someone will object&mdash;<q>But suppose he does
wrong and often fails to offer to the gods their sacred
rites?</q> Then indeed I answer that we ought to
convict a man of that sort, so that he may not by
wickedness offend the gods; but that we ought
not to dishonour him until he has been convicted.
Nor indeed is it reasonable that when we have set
our hands to this business, we should take away their
honour not only from these offenders but also from
those who are worthy to be honoured. Then let
every priest, like every magistrate, be treated with
respect, since there is also an oracle to that effect
from the Didymaean god:<note place='foot'>Apollo.</note>)
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<lg>
<l>Ὅσσοι ἐς ἀρητῆρας ἀτασθαλίῃσι νόοιο</l>
<l>Ἀθανάτων ῥέζουσ᾽ ἀποφώλια, καὶ γεράεσσιν</l>
<l>[D] Ἀντία βουλεύουσιν ἀδεισιθέοισι λογισμοῖς,</l>
<l>Οὐκέθ᾽ ὅλην βιότοιο διεκπερόωσιν ἀταρπόν,</l>
<l>Ὅσσοι περ μακάρεσσιν ἐλωβήσαντο θεοῖσιν,</l>
<l>Ὧν κεῖνοι θεόσεπτον ἕλον θεραπηίδα τιμήν,</l>
</lg>

<p>
(<q>As for men who with
reckless minds work wickedness against the priests
of the deathless gods and plot against their privileges
with plans that fear not the gods, never shall
such men travel life's path to the end, men who
have sinned against the blessed gods whose honour
and holy service those priests have in charge.</q><note place='foot'>An oracle from an unknown source: these verses occur
again in <hi rend='italic'>Epistle</hi> 62. 451 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a</hi>.</note>)
</p>

</quote>

<p>
καὶ πάλιν ἐν ἄλλοις ὁ θεός φησι
</p>

<p>
(And again in another oracle the god says:)
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<lg>
<l>Πάντας μὲν θεράποντας ἐμοὺς ὀλοῆς κακότητος&mdash;,</l>
</lg>

<p>
(<q>All
my servants from harmful mischief&mdash;&mdash;;</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Sc.</hi> I will protect.</note>)
</p>

</quote>

<p>
καί φησιν ὑπὲρ τούτων δίκην ἐπιθήσειν αὐτοῖς.
</p>

<p>
(and he
says that on their behalf he will inflict punishment
on the aggressors.)
</p>

<p>
Πολλῶν δὲ εἰρημένων τοιούτων παρὰ τοῦ θεοῦ,
δι᾽ ὧν ἔνεστι μαθόντας ὅπως χρὴ τιμᾶν καὶ
θεραπεύειν τοὺς ἱερέας, εἰρήσεταί μοι διὰ πλειόνων
ἐν ἄλλοις· ἀπόχρη δὲ νῦν, ὅτι μὴ σχεδιάζω
μηδέν, [B] ἐπιδεῖξαι τήν τε ἐκ τοῦ θεοῦ πρόρρησιν
καὶ τὸ ἐπίταγμα τῶν αὐτοῦ λόγων ἱκανὸν
ἡγούμενος. εἴ τις οὖν ἀξιόπιστον ὑπείληφεν
ἐμὲ διδάσκαλον τῶν τοιούτων, αἰδεσθεὺς τὸν
<pb n='320'/><anchor id='Pg320'/><anchor id='Pg321'/>
θεὸν ἐκείνῳ πειθέσθω καὶ τοὺς ἱερέας τῶν
θεῶν τιμάτω διαφερόντως· ὁποῖον δὲ αὐτὸν εἶναι
χρή, πειράσομαι νῦν εἰπεῖν, οὐχ ἕνεκα σοῦ· τοῦτο
μὲν γὰρ εἰ μὴ τό νῦν ἠπιστάμην, ἅμα μὲν τοῦ
καθηγεμόνος, ἅμα δὲ τῶν μεγίστων θεῶν μαρτυρούντων,
ὅτι τὴν λειτουργίαν [C] ταύτην διαθήσῃ
καλῶς, ὅσα γε εἰς προαίρεσιν ἥκει τὴν σήν, οὐδ᾽
ἂν ἐτόλμησά σοι μεταδοῦναι τοσούτου πράγματος·
ἀλλ᾽ ὅπως ἔχῃς ἐντεῦθεν διδάσκειν τοὺς
ἄλλους, οὐκ ἐν ταῖς πόλεσι μόνον, ἀλλὰ καὶ ἐν
τοῖς ἀγροῖς εὐλογώτερον καὶ ἐπ᾽ ἐξουσίας, ὡς οὐκ
οἴκοθεν αὐτὰ νοεῖς καὶ πράττεις μόνος, ἔχεις δὲ
καὶ ἐμὲ σύμψηφον σεαυτῷ, δοκοῦντα γε εἶναι
διὰ τοὺς θεοὺς ἀρχιερέα μέγιστον, ἄξιον μὲν οὐδαμῶς
πράγματος τοσούτου, βουλόμενον δὲ εἶναι
καὶ προσευχόμενον ἀεὶ τοῖς θεοῖς. [D] εὖ γὰρ ἴσθι,
μεγάλας ἡμῖν οἱ θεοὶ μετὰ τὴν τελευτὴν ἐλπίδας
ἐπαγγέλλονται. πειστέον δὲ αὐτοῖς πάντως.
ἀψευδεῖν γὰρ εἰώθασιν οὐχ ὑπὲρ ἐκείνων μόνον,
ἀλλὰ καὶ τῶν ἐν τῷ βίῳ τῷδε. οἱ δὲ διὰ
περιουσίαν δυνάμεως οἷοί [299] τε ὄντες καὶ τῆς ἐν τῷ
βίῳ τούτῳ περιγενέσθαι ταραχῆς καὶ τὸ ἄτακτον
αὐτοῦ καὶ τὸ ἀλλόκοτον ἐπανορθοῦν ἆρ᾽ οὐκ ἐν
ἐκείνῳ μᾶλλον, ὅπου διῄρηται τὰ μαχόμενα, χωρισθείσης
μὲν τῆς ἀθανάτου ψυχῆς, γῆς δὲ γενομένου
τοῦ νεκροῦ σώματος, ἱκανοὶ παρασχεῖν
ἔσονται ταῦθ᾽ ὅσαπερ ἐπηγγείλαντο τοῖς ἀνθρώποις;
εἰδότες οὖν, ὅτι μεγάλας ἔχειν ἔδοσαν
<pb n='322'/><anchor id='Pg322'/><anchor id='Pg323'/>
οἱ θεοὶ τοῖς ἱερεῦσι τὰς ἀμοιβάς, ἐγγύους αὐτοὺς
ἐν πᾶσι [B] τῆς ἀξίας τῶν θεῶν κατασκευάσωμεν, ὧν
πρὸς τὰ πλήθη χρὴ λέγειν δεῖγμα τὸν ἑαυτῶν
ἐκφέροντας βίον.
</p>

<p>
(Now though there are many utterances of the god
to the same effect, by means of which we may learn
to honour and cherish priests as we ought, I shall
speak on this subject elsewhere at greater length.
But for the present it is enough to point out that I
am not inventing anything offhand, since I think
that the declaration made by the god and the
injunction expressed in his own words are sufficient.
Therefore let any man who considers that as a
teacher of such matters I am worthy to be believed
show due respect to the god and obey him, and
honour the priests of the gods above all other men.
And now I will try to describe what sort of man a
priest himself ought to be, though not for your
especial benefit. For if I did not already know
from the evidence both of the high priest and of
the most mighty gods that you administer this
priestly office aright&mdash;at least all matters that come
under your management&mdash;I should not have ventured
to confide to you a matter so important. But I do so
in order that you may be able from what I say to
instruct the other priests, not only in the cities but
in the country districts also, more convincingly and
with complete freedom; since not of your own self
do you alone devise these precepts and practise
them, but you have me also to give you support,
who by the grace of the gods am known as sovereign
pontiff, though I am indeed by no means worthy
of so high an office; though I desire, and moreover
constantly pray to the gods that I may be
worthy. For the gods, you must know, hold out
great hopes for us after death; and we must
believe them absolutely. For they are always
truthful, not only about the future life, but about
the affairs of this life also. And since in the superabundance
of their power they are able both to
overcome the confusion that exists in this life and
to regulate its disorders and irregularities, will they
not all the more in that other life where conflicting
things are reconciled, after the immortal soul has
been separated from the body and the lifeless body
has turned to earth, be able to bestow all those
things for which they have held out hopes to mankind?
Therefore since we know that the gods
have granted to their priests a great recompense, let
us make them responsible in all things for men's
esteem of the gods, displaying their own lives as
an example of what they ought to preach to the
people.)
</p>

<p>
Ἀρκτέον δὲ ἡμῖν τῆς πρὸς τοὺς θεοὺς εὐσεβείας.
οὕτω γὰρ ἡμᾶς πρέπει τοῖς θεοῖς λειτουργεῖν ὡς
παρεστηκόσιν αὐτοῖς καὶ ὁρῶσι μὲν ἡμᾶς, οὐχ
ὁρωμένοις δὲ ὑφ᾽ ἡμῶν καὶ τὸ πάσης αὐγᾶς ὄμμα
κρεῖττον ἄχρι [C] τῶν ἀποκρυπτομένων ἡμῖν λογισμῶν
διατετακόσιν. ὅτι δὲ οὐκ ἐμὸς ὁ λόγος
οὗτος ἐστιν, ἀλλὰ τοῦ θεοῦ, διὰ πολλῶν μὲν
εἰρημένος λόγων, ἐμοὶ δὲ δῆτα ἀπόχρη καὶ ἕνα
παραθεμένῳ δύο δι᾽ ἑνὸς παραστῆσαι, πῶς μὲν
ὁρῶσιν οἱ θεοὶ πάντα, πῶς δὲ ῍πὶ τοῖς εὐσεβέσιν
εὐφραίνονται·
</p>

<p>
(The first thing we ought to preach is reverence
towards the gods. For it is fitting that we should
perform our service to the gods as though they
were themselves present with us and beheld us, and
though not seen by us could direct their gaze, which
is more powerful than any light, even as far as
our hidden thoughts. And this saying is not my
own<note place='foot'>Euripides, <hi rend='italic'>fr.</hi> 488 Nauck; cf. 197 <hi rend='smallcaps'>c</hi>, 358 <hi rend='smallcaps'>d</hi>, 387 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b</hi>, 391
this phrase became a proverb; cf. Lucian, <hi rend='italic'>Hermotimus</hi> 789.</note> but the god's, and has been declared in many
utterances, but for me surely it is sufficient, by
bringing forth one such utterance, to illustrate two
things in one, namely how the gods see all things
and how they rejoice in god-fearing men:)
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<lg>
<l>Πάντη Φοιβείη τέταται τανυσίσκοπος ἀκτίς·</l>
<l>[D] Καί τε διὰ στερεῶν χωρεῖ θοὸν ὄμμα πετράων,</l>
<l>Καὶ διὰ κυανέης ἁλὸς ἔρχεται, οὐδέ ἑ λήθει</l>
<l>Πληθὺς ἀστερόεσσα παλινδίνητος ἰοῦσα</l>
<l>Οὐρανὸν εἰς ἀκάμαντα σοφῆς κατὰ θεσμὸν ἀνάγκης,</l>
<l>Οὐδ᾽ ὅσα νερτερίων ὑπεδέξατο φῦλα καμόντων</l>
<l>Τάρταρος [300] ἀχλυόεντος<note place='foot'>ἀχλυόεντος Hertlein suggests; ἀχλυόεσσαν MSS.</note> ὑπὸ ζόφον ἀίδος εἴσω·</l>
<l>Εὐσεβέσιν δὲ βροτοῖς γάνυμαι τόσον, ὅσσον Ὀλύμπῳ.</l>
</lg>

<p>
(<q>On all
sides extend the far-seeing rays of Phoebus. His
swift gaze pierces even through sturdy rocks, and
travels through the dark blue sea, nor is he unaware
of the starry multitude that passes in returning
circuit through the unwearied heavens for ever by
the statutes of necessity; nor of all the tribes of
the dead in the underworld whom Tartarus has admitted
within the misty dwelling of Hades, beneath
the western darkness. And I delight in god-fearing
men as much even as in Olympus.</q><note place='foot'>An oracle from an unknown source.</note>)
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Ὅσῳ δὲ λίθου καὶ πέτρας ἅπασα μὲν ψυχή,
πολὺ δὲ πλέον ἡ τῶν ἀνθρώπων οἰκειότερον ἔχει
καὶ συγγενέστερον πρὸς τοὺς θεούς, τοσούτῳ
μᾶλλον εἰκός ἐστι ῥᾷον καὶ ἐνεργέστερον δι᾽ αὐτῆς
<pb n='324'/><anchor id='Pg324'/><anchor id='Pg325'/>
χωρεῖν τῶν θεῶν τὸ ὄμμα. [B] θέα<note place='foot'>θέα Brambs, MSS., θεῷ Reiske, Cobet, Hertlein.</note> δὲ τὴν φιλανθρωπίαν
τοῦ θεοῦ γάνυσθαι φάσκοντος τῇ τῶν
εὐσεβῶν ἀνδρῶν διανοίᾳ ὅσον Ὀλύμπῳ τῷ καθαρωτάτῳ.
πῶς<note place='foot'>πῶς Hertlein suggests, πάντως MSS.</note> ἡμῖν οὗτως οὐχὶ καὶ ἀνάξει τὰς
ψυχὰς ἡμῶν ἀπὸ τοῦ ζόφου καὶ τοῦ Ταρτάρου
μετ᾽ εὐσεβείας αὐτῷ προσιόντων; οἶδε μὲν γὰρ καὶ
τοὺς ἐν τῷ Ταρτάρῳ κατακεκλεισμένους· οὐδὲ γὰρ
ἐκεῖνα τῆς τῶν θεῶν ἐκτὸς πίπτει δυνάμεως·
ἐπαγγέλλεται δὲ τοῖς [C] εὐσεβέσι τὸν Ὄλυμπον ἀντὶ
τοῦ Ταρτάρου. διόπερ χρὴ μάλιστα τῶν τῆς
εὐσεβείας ἔργων ἀντέχεσθαι προσιόντας μὲν τοῖς
θεοῖς μετ᾽ εὐλαβείας, αἰσχρὸν μηδὲν μήτε λέγοντας
μήτε ἀκούοντας. ἁγνεύειν δὲ χρὴ τοὺς ἱερέας οὐκ
ἔργων μόνον ἀκαθάρτων οὐδὲ ἀσελγῶν πράξεων,
ἀλλὰ καὶ ῥημάτων καὶ ἀκροαμάτων τοιούτων.
ἐξελατέα τοίνυν ἐστὶν ἡμῖν πάντα τὰ ἐπαχθῆ
σκώμματα, πᾶσα δὲ ἀσελγῆς ὁμιλία. καὶ ὅπως
εἰδέναι ἔχῃς ὃ βούλομαι φράζειν, ἱερωμένος τις
μήτε Ἀρχίλοχον [D] ἀναγινωσκέτω μήτε Ἱππώνακτα
μήτε ἄλλον τινὰ τῶν τὰ τοιαῦτα γραφόντων.
ἀποκλινέτω καὶ τῆς παλαιᾶς κωμῳδίας ὅσα τῆς
τοιαύτης ἰδέας· ἄμεινον μὲν γάρ· καὶ πάντως
πρέποι δ᾽ ἂν ἡμῖν ἡ φιλοσοφία μόνη, καὶ τούτων
οἱ θεοὺς ἡγεμόνας προστησάμενοι τῆς ἑαυτῶν
παιδείας, ὥσπερ<note place='foot'>ὥσπερ Hertlein suggests, ὅπερ MSS.</note> Πυθαγόρας καὶ Πλάτων καὶ
Ἀριστοτέλης οἵ τε ἀμφὶ Χρύσιππον καὶ Ζήνωνα.
προσεκτέον μὲν γὰρ οὔτε πᾶσιν οὔτε τοῖς πάντων
δόγμασιν, [301] ἀλλὰ ἐκείνοις μόνον καὶ ἐκείνων, ὅσα
<pb n='326'/><anchor id='Pg326'/><anchor id='Pg327'/>
εὐσεβείας ἐστὶ ποιητικὰ καὶ διδάσκει περὶ θεῶν
πρῶτον μὲν ὡς εἰσίν, εἶτα ὡς προνοοῦσι τῶν τῇδε,
καὶ ὡς ἐργάζονται μὲν οὐδὲ ἓν κακὸν οὔτε ἀνθρώπους
οὔτε ἀλλήλους φθονοῦντες καὶ βασκαίνοντες
καὶ πολεμοῦντες, ὁποῖα γράφοντες οἱ μὲν παρ᾽
ἡμῖν ποιηταὶ κατεφρονήθησαν, οἱ δὲ τῶν Ἰουδαίων
προφῆται διατεταμένως συγκατασκευάζοντες [B] ὑπὸ
τῶν ἀθλίων τούτων τῶν προσνειμάντων ἑαυτοὺς
τοῖς Γαλιλαίοις θαυμάζονται.
</p>

<p>
(Now in so far as all soul, but in a much higher
degree the soul of man, is akin to and related to the
gods, so much the more is it likely that the gaze of
the gods should penetrate through his soul easily and
effectively. And observe the love of the god for
mankind when he says that he delights in the disposition
of god-fearing men as much as in Olympus
most pure and bright. How then shall he not lead
up our souls from the darkness and from Tartarus, if
we approach him with pious awe? And indeed he
has knowledge even of those who have been imprisoned
in Tartarus&mdash;for not even that region falls
outside the power of the gods,&mdash;and to the god-fearing
he promises Olympus instead of Tartarus.
Wherefore we ought by all means to hold fast
to deeds of piety, approaching the gods with
reverence, and neither saying nor listening to
anything base. And the priests ought to keep
themselves pure not only from impure or shameful
acts, but also from uttering words and hearing
speeches of that character. Accordingly we must
banish all offensive jests and all licentious intercourse.
And that you may understand what I
mean by this, let no one who has been consecrated
a priest read either Archilochus or Hipponax<note place='foot'>Hipponax of Ephesus, a scurrilous poet who wrote in
choliambics (the skazon) and flourished about the middle of
the sixth century <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi>; cf. Horace, <hi rend='italic'>Epodes</hi> 6. 12.</note> or
anyone else who writes such poems as theirs. And
in Old Comedy let him avoid everything of that
type&mdash;for it is better so&mdash;and indeed on all accounts
philosophy alone will be appropriate for us priests;
and of philosophers only those who chose the gods
as guides of their mental discipline, like Pythagoras
and Plato and Aristotle, and the school of Chrysippus
and Zeno. For we ought not to give heed to them
all nor to the doctrines of all, but only to those
philosophers and those of their doctrines that make
men god-fearing, and teach concerning the gods, first
that they exist, secondly that they concern themselves
with the things of this world, and further that
they do no injury at all either to mankind or to one
another out of jealousy or envy or enmity. I mean
the sort of thing our poets in the first place have
brought themselves into disrepute by writing, and
in the second place such tales as the prophets of
the Jews take pains to invent, and are admired for
so doing by those miserable men who have attached
themselves to the Galilaeans.)
</p>

<p>
Πρέποι δ᾽ ἂν ἡμῖν ἱστορίαις ἐντυγχάνειν, ὁπόσαι
συνεγράφησαν ἐπὶ πεποιημένοις τοῖς ἔργοις· ὅσα
δὲ ἐστιν ἐν ἱστορίας εἴδει παρὰ τοῖς ἔμπροσθεν
ἀπηγγελμένα πλάσματα παραιτητέον, ἐρωτικὰς
ὑποθέσεις καὶ πάντα ἁπλῶς τὰ τοιαῦτα. καθάπερ
γὰρ οὐδὲ ὁδὸς πᾶσα τοῖς ἱερωμένοις ἁρμόττει,
τετάχθαι δὲ χρὴ καὶ ταύτας, [C] οὕτως οὐδὲ ἀνάγνωσμα
πᾶν ἱερωμένῳ πρέπει. ἐγγίνεται γάρ
τις τῇ ψυχῇ διάθεσις ὑπὸ τῶν λόγων, καὶ κατ᾽
ὀλίγον ἐγείρει τὰς ἐπιθυμίας, εἶτα ἐξαίφνης
ἀνάπτει δεινὴν φλόγα, πρὸς ἣν οἶμαι χρὴ πόρρωθεν
παρατετάχθαι.
</p>

<p>
(But for us it will be appropriate to read such
narratives as have been composed about deeds that
have actually been done; but we must avoid all
fictions in the form of narrative such as were circulated
among men in the past, for instance tales
whose theme is love, and generally speaking everything
of that sort. For just as not every road is
suitable for consecrated priests, but the roads they
travel ought to be duly assigned, so not every sort
of reading is suitable for a priest. For words breed
a certain sort of disposition in the soul, and little by
little it arouses desires, and then on a sudden kindles
a terrible blaze, against which one ought, in my
opinion, to arm oneself well in advance.)
</p>

<p>
Μήτε Ἐπικούρειος εἰσίτω λόγος μήτε Πυρρώνειος·
ἤδη μὲν γὰρ καλῶς ποιοῦντες οἱ θεοὶ καὶ
ἀνῃρήκασιν, [D] ὥστε ἐπιλείπειν καὶ τὰ πλεῖστα
τῶν βιβλίων. ὅμως οὐδὲν κωλύει τύπου χάριν
ἐπιμνησθῆναι μὲν καὶ τούτων, ὁποίων χρὴ μάλιστα
τοὺς ἱερέας ἀπέχεσθαι λόγων, εἰ δὲ λόγων, πολὺ
πρότερον ἐννοιῶν. οὐδὲ γὰρ οἶμαι ταὐτόν ἐστιν
<pb n='328'/><anchor id='Pg328'/><anchor id='Pg329'/>
ἁμάρτημα γλώττης καὶ διανοίας, ἀλλ᾽ ἐκείνην
χρὴ μάλιστα θεραπεύειν, ὡς καὶ τῆς γλώττης
ἐκείνῃ συνεξαμαρτανούσης. ἐκμανθάνειν χρὴ τοὺς
ὕμνους τῶν θεῶν· εἰσὶ δὲ οὗτοι πολλοὶ μὲν καὶ
καλοὶ πεποιημένοι παλαιοῖς καὶ νέοις· οὐ μὴν
ἀλλ᾽ ἐκείνους πειρατέον ἐπίστασθαι τοὺς ἐν τοῖς
ἱεροῖς ᾀδομένους. οἱ πλεῖστοι γὰρ ὑπ᾽ αὐτῶν
τῶν θεῶν ἱκετευθέντων ἐδόθησαν, [302] ὀλίγοι δέ τινες
ἐποιήθησαν καὶ παρὰ ἀνθρώπων, ὑπὸ πνεύματος
ἐνθέου καὶ ψυχῆς ἀβάτου τοῖς κακοῖς ἐπὶ τῇ τῶν
θεῶν τιμῇ συγκείμενοι.
</p>

<p>
(Let us not admit discourses by Epicurus or
Pyrrho; but indeed the gods have already in
their wisdom destroyed their works, so that most
of their books have ceased to be. Nevertheless
there is no reason why I should not, by way of
example, mention these works too, to show what
sort of discourses priests must especially avoid; and
if such discourses, then much more must they avoid
such thoughts. For an error of speech is, in my
opinion, by no means the same as an error of the
mind, but we ought to give heed to the mind first of
all, since the tongue sins in company with it. We
ought to learn by heart the hymns in honour of the
gods&mdash;many and beautiful they are, composed
by men of old and of our own time&mdash;though indeed
we ought to try to know also those which are being
sung in the temples. For the greater number were
bestowed on us by the gods themselves, in answer
to prayer, though some few also were written by
men, and were composed in honour of the gods by
the aid of divine inspiration and a soul inaccessible
to things evil.)
</p>

<p>
Ταῦτά γε ἄξιον ἐπιτηδεύειν καὶ εὔχεσθαι
πολλάκις τοῖς θεοῖς ἰδίᾳ καὶ δημοσίᾳ, μάλιστα
μὲν τρὶς τῆς ἡμέρας, εἰ δὲ μή, πάντως ὄρθρου γε<note place='foot'>γε Hertlein suggests, τε MSS.</note>
καὶ δείλης· οὐδὲ γὰρ εὔλογον ἄθυτον ἄγειν ἡμέραν
ἢ νύκτα τὸν ἱερωμένον· [B] ἀρχὴ δὲ ὄρθρος μὲν ἡμέρας,
ὀψία δὲ νυκτός. εὔλογον δὲ ἀμφοτέρων τοῖς θεοῖς
ἀπάρχεσθαι τῶν διαστημάτων, ὅταν ἔξωθεν τῆς
ἱερατικῆς ὄντες τυγχάνωμεν, λειτουργίας· ὡς τά
γε ἐν τοῖς ἱεροῖς, ὅσα πάτριος διαγορεύει νόμος,
φυλάττειν πρέπει, καὶ οὔτε πλέον οὔτε ἔλαττόν
τι ποιητέον αὐτῶν· ἀίδια γάρ ἐστι τὰ τῶν θεῶν·
ὥστε καὶ ἡμᾶς χρὴ μιμεῖσθαι τὴν οὐσίαν αὐτῶν,
[C] ἵν᾽ αὐτοὺς ἱλασκώμεθα διὰ τοῦτο πλέον.
</p>

<p>
(All this, at least, we ought to study to do, and
we ought also to pray often to the gods, both in
private and in public, if possible three times a day,
but if not so often, certainly at dawn and in the
evening. For it is not meet that a consecrated
priest should pass a day or a night without sacrifice;
and dawn is the beginning of the day as twilight is
of the night. And it is proper to begin both periods
with sacrifice to the gods, even when we happen
not to be assigned to perform the service. For it
is our duty to maintain all the ritual of the temples
that the law of our fathers prescribes, and we ought
to perform neither more nor less than that ritual;
for eternal are the gods, so that we too ought to
imitate their essential nature in order that thereby
we may make them propitious.)
</p>

<p>
Εἰ μὲν οὖν ἦμεν αὐτοψυχαὶ μόναι τὸ σῶμα δὲ
πρὸς μηδὲν ἡμῖν διώχλει, καλῶς ἂν εἶχεν ἕνα τινὰ
τοῖς ἱερεῦσιν ἀφορέζειν βίον· ἐπεὶ δὲ οὐχ ἱερεῦσιν
ἁπλῶς, ἀλλὰ καὶ τῷ<note place='foot'>τῷ Wright, ὡς Hertlein, MSS. The meaning is not clear
and Petavius suspects corruption.</note> ἱερεῖ προσήκει μόνον, ὃ δὴ
κατὰ τὸν καιρὸν τῆς λειτουργίας ἐπιτηδευτέον,
<pb n='330'/><anchor id='Pg330'/><anchor id='Pg331'/>
τί δὲ τῷ<note place='foot'>τῷ Hertlein suggests, ὡς MSS.</note> ἱερατεύειν ἀνθρώπῳ λαχόντι συγχωρητέον,
ὅταν ἐκτὸς ᾖ τῆς ἐν τοῖς ἱεροῖς λειτουργίας;
οἶμαι δὲ χρῆναι [D] τὸν ἱερέα πάντων ἁγνεύσαντα
νύκτα καὶ ἡμέραν, εἶτα ἄλλην ἐπ᾽ αὐτῇ νύκτα
καθηράμενον οἷς διαγορεύουσιν οἱ θεσμοὶ καθαρμοῖς
οὕτως εἴσω φοιτῶντα τοῦ ἱεροῦ μένειν ὅσας
ἂν ἡμέρας ὁ νόμος κελεύῃ. τριάκοντα μὲν γὰρ αἱ
παρ᾽ ἡμῖν εἰσιν ἐν Ῥώμῃ, παρ᾽ ἄλλοις δὲ ἄλλως.
εὔλογον οὖν οἶμαι μένειν ἁπάσας ταύτας τὰς
ἡμέρας ἐν τοῖς ἱεροῖς φιλοσοφοῦντα, καὶ μήτε
εἰς οἰκίαν βαδίζειν μήτε εἰς ἀγοράν, [303] ἀλλὰ μηδὲ
ἄρχοντα πλὴν ἐν τοῖς ἱεροῖς ὁρᾶν, ἐπιμελεῖσθαι
δὲ τῆς περὶ τὸ θεῖον θεραπείας αὐτὸν ἐφορῶντα
πάντα καὶ διατάττοντα, πληρώσαντα δὲ τὰς
ἡμέρας εἶτα ἑτέρῳ παραχωρεῖν τῆς λειτουργίας.
ἐπὶ δὲ τὸν ἀνθρώπινον τρεπομένῳ βίον ἐξέστω
καὶ βαδίζειν εἰς οἰκίαν φίλου καὶ εἰς ἑστίασιν
ἀπαντᾶν παρακληθέντα, [B] μὴ πάντων, ἀλλὰ τῶν
βελτίστων· ἐν τούτῳ δὲ καὶ εἰς ἀγορὰν παρελθεῖν
οὐκ ἄτοπον ὀλιγάκις, ἡγεμόνα τε προσειπεῖν καὶ
ἔθνους ἄρχοντα, καὶ τοῖς εὐλόγως δεομένοις ὅσα
ἐνδέχεται βοηθῆσαι.
</p>

<p>
(Now if we were pure soul alone, and our bodies
did not hinder us in any respect, it would be well
to prescribe one sort of life for priests. But since
what he should practise when on duty concerns the
individual priest alone, not priests absolutely, what
should we concede to a man who has received the
office of priest, on occasions when he is not actually
engaged in service in the temples? I think that
a priest ought to keep himself pure from all contamination,
for a night and a day, and then after
purifying himself for another night following on
the first, with such rites of purification as the
sacred laws prescribe, he should under these conditions
enter the temple and remain there for as
many days as the law commands. (Thirty is the
number with us at Rome, but in other places the
number varies.) It is proper then, I think, that he
should remain throughout all these days in the
sacred precincts, devoting himself to philosophy,
and that he should not enter a house or a market-place,
or see even a magistrate, except in the
precincts, but should concern himself with his
service to the god, overseeing and arranging everything
in person; and then, when he has completed
the term of days, he should retire from his office in
favour of another. And when he turns again to the
ordinary life of mankind, he may be allowed to visit
a friend's house, and, when invited, to attend a
feast, but not on the invitation of all but only of
persons of the highest character. And at this time
there would be nothing out of the way in his going
occasionally to the market-place and conversing
with the governor or the chief magistrate of his
tribe, and giving aid, as far as lies in his power, to
those who have a good reason for needing it.)
</p>

<p>
Πρέπει δὲ οἶμαι τοῖς ἱερῦσιν ἔνδον μέν, ὅτε
λειτουργοῦσιν, ἐσθῆτι χρῆσθαι μεγαλοπρεπεστάτῃ,
τῶν ἱερῶν δὲ ἔξω τῇ συνήθει δίχα πολυτελείας·
<pb n='332'/><anchor id='Pg332'/><anchor id='Pg333'/>
οὐδὲ γὰρ εὔλογον τοῖς δεδομένοις ἡμῖν ἐπὶ
τιμῇ θεῶν εἰς κενοδοξίαν καταχρῆσθαι καὶ τύφον
μάταιον. [C] ὅθεν ἀφεκτέον ἡμῖν ἐσθῆτος πολυτελεστέρας
ἐν ἀγορᾷ καὶ κόμπου ἢ καὶ πάσης
ἁπλῶς ἀλαζονείας. οἱ γοῦν θεοὶ τὴν τοσαύτην
ἀγασθέντες Ἀμφιαράου σωφροσύνην, ἐπειδὴ τοῦ
στρατεύματος ἐκείνου κατεδίκασαν φθορὰν εἰδώς
τε αὐτὸς συνεστρατεύετο καὶ ἦν ἄφευκτον αὐτῷ
διὰ τοῦτο τὸ πεπρωμένον, ἀπέφηναν αὐτὸν ἄλλον
ἐξ ἄλλου καὶ μετέστησαν εἰς λῆξιν θείαν. πάντων
γοῦν τῶν ἐπιστρατευσάντων ταῖς Θήβαις
ἐπὶ τῶν ἀσπίδων [D] πρὶν κατεργάσασθαι σήματα
γραφόντων καὶ ἐγειρόντων τὰ τρόπαια
κατὰ τῆς συμφορᾶς<note place='foot'>κατὰ τῆς συμφορᾶς Hertlein suggests, καὶ τὰς συμφορὰς
MSS.</note> τῶν Καδμείων, ὁ τῶν θεῶν
ὁμιλητὴς ἄσημα μὲν ἐπεστράτευεν ἔχων ὅπλα,
πρᾳότητα δὲ καὶ σωφροσύνην ὡς καὶ<note place='foot'>ὡς καὶ Hertlein would add.</note> ὑπὸ τῶν
πολεμίων ἐμαρτυρεῖτο. διόπερ οἶμαι χρὴ καὶ
τοὺς ἱερέας ἡμᾶς τὰ περὶ τὰς ἐσθῆτας σωφρονεῖν,<note place='foot'>ἡμᾶς&mdash;σωφρονεῖν Cobet suggests, lacuna Hertlein, MSS.</note>
ἵνα τυγχάνωμεν εὐμενῶν τῶν θεῶν· ὡς οὐ μικρά
γε εἰς αὐτοὺς ἐξαμαρτάνομεν δημούμενοι τὰς
ἱερὰς ἐσθῆτας [304] καὶ δημοσιεύοντες καὶ παρέχοντες
ἁπλῶς περιβλέπειν τοῖς ἀνθρώποις ὥσπερ τι
θαυμαστόν. εἰ γὰρ τοῦτο<note place='foot'>εἰ γὰρ τοῦτο Hertlein suggests, εἴπερ ἐκ τούτου MSS.</note> συμβαίνει, πολλοὶ
πελάζουσιν ἡμῖν οὐ καθαροί, καὶ διὰ τοῦτο χραίνεται
τὰ τῶν θεῶν σύμβολα. τὸ δὲ καὶ ἡμᾶς
<pb n='334'/><anchor id='Pg334'/><anchor id='Pg335'/>
αὐτοὺς οὐχ ἱερατικῶς ζῶντας ἱερέων ἐσθῆτα
περικεῖσθαι πόσης ἐστὶ παρανομίας καὶ καταφρονήσεως
εἰς τοὺς θεούς; εἰρήσεται μὲν οὖν ἡμῖν
καὶ περὶ τούτων ἐν ἄλλοις<note place='foot'>ἔν ἄλλοις Cobet would add; cf. 298 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a</hi>.</note> δι᾽ ἀκριβείας· νυνὶ δὲ
ὡς τύπῳ πρὸς σὲ γράφω περὶ αὐτῶν.
</p>

<p>
(And it is in my opinion fitting for priests to wear
the most magnificent dress when they are within the
temple performing the services, but when they are
outside the sacred precincts to wear ordinary dress,
without any extravagance. For it is not rational
that we should misuse, in empty conceit and vain
ostentation, what has been given to us for the honour
of the gods. And for this reason we ought in the
market place to abstain from too costly dress and
from outward show, and in a word from every sort of
pretentiousness. For consider how the gods, because
they admired the perfect moderation of Amphiaraus,<note place='foot'><p>Cf. Aeschylus, <hi rend='italic'>Seven Against Thebes</hi>; Euripides, <hi rend='italic'>Phoenissae</hi>
1118.
</p>
<p>
ὁ μάντις Ἀμφιάραος οὐ σημεῖ᾽ ἔχων<lb/>
ὑβρισμέν᾽, ἀλλὰ σωφρόνως ἄσημ᾽ ὅπλα.</p></note>
after they had decreed the destruction of that famous
army&mdash;and he, though he knew that it would be so,
went with the expedition and therefore did not
escape his fated end,&mdash;the gods I say transformed
him completely from what he had been, and removed
him to the sphere of the gods. For all the others
who were in the expedition against Thebes engraved
a device on their shields before they had conquered
the enemy, and erected trophies to celebrate the
downfall of the Cadmeans; but he, the associate of
the gods, when he went to war had arms with no
device; but gentleness he had, and moderation, as
even the enemy bore witness. Hence I think that
we priests ought to show moderation in our dress, in
order that we may win the goodwill of the gods,
since it is no slight offence that we commit against
them when we wear in public the sacred dress and
make it public property, and in a word give all men
an opportunity to stare at it as though it were something
marvellous. For whenever this happens, many
who are not purified come near us, and by this means
the symbols of the gods are polluted. Moreover
what lawlessness it is, what arrogance towards the
gods for us ourselves when we are not living the
priestly life to wear the priestly dress! However, of
this too I shall speak more particularly in another
place; and what I am writing to you at the moment
is only a mere outline of the subject.)
</p>

<p>
[B] Τοῖς ἀσελγέσι τούτοις θεάτροις τῶν ἱερέων
μηδεὶς μηδαμοῦ παραβαλλέτω μηδὲ εἰς τὴν οἰκίαν
εἰσαγέτω τὴν ἑαυτοῦ· πρέπει γὰρ οὐδαμῶς. καὶ
εἰ μὲν οἷόν τε ἦν ἐξελάσαι παντάπασιν αὐτὰ
τῶν θεάτρων, ὥστε αὐτὰ πάλιν ἀποδοῦναι τῷ
Διονύσῳ καθαρὰ γενόμενα, πάντως ἂν ἐπειράθην
αὐτὸ προθύμως κατασκευάσαι. [C] νυνὶ δὲ οἰόμενος
τοῦτο οὔτε δυνατὸν οὔτε ἄλλως, εἰ καὶ δυνατὸν
φανείη, συμφέρον ἂν αὐτὸ γενέσθαι, ταύτης μὲν
ἀπεσχόμην παντάπασι τῆς φιλοτιμίας· ἀξιῶ δὲ
τοὺς ἱερέας ὑποχωρῆσαι καὶ ἀποστῆναι τῷ δήμῳ
τῆς ἐν τοῖς θεάτροις ἀσελγείας. μηδεὶς οὖν ἱερεὺς
εἰς θέατρον εἰσίτω, μηδὲ ἐχέτω<note place='foot'>ἐχέτω Petavius suggests, lacuna Hertlein, MSS.</note> φίλον θυμελικὸν
μηδὲ ἁρματηλάτην, μηδὲ ὀρχηστὴς μηδὲ μῖμος
αὐτοῦ τῇ θύρᾳ προσίτω· τοῖς ἱεροῖς ἀγῶσιν
[D] ἐπιτρέπω μόνον τῷ βουλομένῳ παραβάλλειν,
ὧν ἀπηγόρευται μετέχειν οὐκ ἀγωνίας μόνον,
ἀλλὰ καὶ θέας ταῖς γυναιξίν. ὑπὲρ δὲ τῶν
κυνηγεσίων τί δεῖ καὶ λέγειν, ὅσα ταῖς πόλεσιν
εἴσω τῶν θεάτρων συντελεῖται, ὡς ἀφεκτέον
τούτων ἐστὶν οὐχ ἱερεῦσι μόνον, ἀλλὰ καὶ
παισὶν ἱερέων;
</p>

<p>
(No priest must anywhere be present at the
licentious theatrical shows of the present day, nor
introduce one into his own house; for that is altogether
unfitting. Indeed if it were possible to banish
such shows absolutely from the theatres so as to restore
to Dionysus those theatres pure as of old, I should
certainly have endeavoured with all my heart to
bring this about; but as it is, since I thought that
this is impossible, and that even if it should prove to
be possible it would not on other accounts be expedient,
I forebore entirely from this ambition. But
I do demand that priests should withdraw themselves
from the licentiousness of the theatres and leave
them to the crowd. Therefore let no priest enter a
theatre or have an actor or a chariot-driver for his
friend; and let no dancer or mime even approach his
door. And as for the sacred games, I permit anyone
who will to attend those only in which women are
forbidden not only to compete but even to be spectators.
With regard to the hunting shows with dogs
which are performed in the cities inside the theatres,
need I say that not only priests but even the sons of
priests must keep away from them?)
</p>

<p>
Ἦν μὲν οὖν ἴσως πρὸ τούτων εἰρῆσθαι καλόν,
ὅθεν καὶ ὅπως χρὴ τοὺς ἱερέας ἀποδεικνύειν· οὐδὲν
δὲ ἄτοπον εἰς τοῦτό μοι τοὺς λόγους λῆξαι. [305] ἐγώ
<pb n='336'/><anchor id='Pg336'/><anchor id='Pg337'/>
φημι τοὺς ἐν ταῖς πόλεσι βελτίστους καὶ μάλιστα
μὲν φιλοθεωτάτους, ἔπειτα φιλανθρωποτάτους,
ἐάν τε πένητες ὦσιν ἐάν τε πλούσιοι· διάκρισις
ἔστω πρὸς τοῦτο μηδ᾽ ἡτισοῦν ἀφανοῦς καὶ
ἐπιφανοῦς· ὁ γὰρ διὰ πρᾳότητα λεληθὼς οὐ διὰ
τὴν τοῦ ἀξιώματος ἀφάνειαν δίκαιός ἐστι κωλύεσθαι.
κἂν πένης οὖν ᾖ τις δημότης ἔχων
ἐν ἑαυτῷ δύο ταῦτα, τό τε φιλόθεον καὶ τὸ
φιλάνθρωπον, ἱερεὺς ἀποδεικνύσθω. [B] δεῖγμα δὲ
τοῦ φιλοθέου μέν, εἰ τοὺς οἰκείους ἅπαντας εἰς
τὴν περὶ τοὺς θεοὺς εὐσέβειαν εἰσαγάγοι, τοῦ
φιλανθρώπου δέ, εἰ καὶ ἐξ ὀλίγων εὐκόλως
κοινωνεῖ τοῖς δεομένοις καὶ μεταδέδωσι προθύμως,
εὖ ποιεῖν ἐπιχειρῶν ὅσους ἂν οἷός τε ᾖ.
</p>

<p>
(Now it would perhaps have been well to say
earlier from what class of men and by what method
priests must be appointed; but it is quite appropriate
that my remarks should end with this. I say
that the most upright men in every city, by preference
those who show most love for the gods, and
next those who show most love for their fellow
men, must be appointed, whether they be poor or
rich. And in this matter let there be no distinction
whatever whether they are unknown or well known.
For the man who by reason of his gentleness has not
won notice ought not to be barred by reason of his
want of fame. Even though he be poor and a man
of the people, if he possess within himself these two
things, love for God and love for his fellow men, let
him be appointed priest. And a proof of his love
for God is his inducing his own people to show
reverence to the gods; a proof of his love for his
fellows is his sharing cheerfully, even from a small
store, with those in need, and his giving willingly
thereof, and trying to do good to as many men as
he is able.)
</p>

<p>
Προσεκτέον γὰρ μάλιστα τῷ μέρει τούτῳ, καὶ
τὴν ἰατρείαν ἐντεῦθεν ποιητέον. ἐπειδὴ γὰρ οἶμαι
συνέβη τοὺς πένητας ἀμελεῖσθαι παρορωμένους
ὑπὸ τῶν ἱερέων, [C] οἱ δυσσεβεῖς Γαλιλαῖοι κατανοήσαντες
ἐπέθεντο ταύτῃ τῇ φιλανθρωπίᾳ, καὶ τὸ
χείριστον τῶν ἔργων διὰ τοῦ εὐδοκιμοῦντος<note place='foot'>εὐδοκιμοῦντος Hertlein suggests, καλλίστου δοκοῦντος
Reiske, δοκοῦντος MSS.</note> τῶν
ἐπιτηδευμάτων ἐκράτυναν. ὥσπερ γὰρ<note place='foot'>γὰρ Hertlein would add.</note> οἱ τὰ
παιδία διὰ τοῦ πλακοῦντος ἐξαπατῶντες τῷ καὶ
δὶς καὶ τρὶς προέσθαι πείθουσιν ἀκολουθεῖν
ἑαυτοῖς, εἶθ᾽, ὅταν ἀποστήσωσι πόρρω τῶν οἰκείων,
ἐμβάλλοντες εἰς ναῦν ἀπέδοντο, καὶ γέγονεν εἰς
ἅπαντα τὸν ἑξῆς βίον πικρὸν τὸ δόξαν πρὸς ὀλίγον
<pb n='338'/><anchor id='Pg338'/><anchor id='Pg339'/>
γλυκύ, [D] τὸν αὐτὸν καὶ αὐτοὶ τρόπον ἀρξάμενοι διὰ
τῆς λεγομένης παρ᾽ αὐτοῖς ἀγάπης καὶ ὑποδοχῆς
καὶ διακονίας τραπεζῶν· ἔστι γὰρ ὥσπερ τὸ ἔργον,
οὕτω δὲ καὶ τοὔνομα παρ᾽ αὐτοῖς πολύ· πλείστους
ἐνήγαγον εἰς τὴν ἀθεότητα....
</p>

<p>
(We must pay especial attention to this point, and
by this means effect a cure. For when it came
about that the poor were neglected and overlooked
by the priests, then I think the impious Galilaeans
observed this fact and devoted themselves to
philanthropy. And they have gained ascendancy
in the worst of their deeds through the credit
they win for such practices. For just as those who
entice children with a cake, and by throwing it to
them two or three times induce them to follow
them, and then, when they are far away from their
friends cast them on board a ship and sell them
as slaves, and that which for the moment seemed
sweet, proves to be bitter for all the rest of their
lives&mdash;by the same method, I say, the Galilaeans
also begin with their so-called love-feast, or hospitality,
or service of tables,&mdash;for they have many
ways of carrying it out and hence call it by many
names,&mdash;the result is that they have led very
many into atheism....<note place='foot'>The conclusion is lost, and may have been suppressed by
Christian copyists.</note>)
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='343'/><anchor id='Pg343'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>The Caesars</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Introduction</head>

<p>
The Caesars, otherwise entitled in the MSS.
Symposium or Kronia (Latin Saturnalia) was written
at Constantinople in 361 and was probably addressed
to Sallust, to whom Julian had sent his lost
work the Kronia.<note place='foot'>cf. <hi rend='italic'>Oration</hi> 4. 157 <hi rend='smallcaps'>c</hi>.</note> The interlocutor in the proœmium<note place='foot'>306 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a</hi>.</note>
is almost certainly Sallust.
</p>

<p>
<q>Caesar</q> was in Julian's time a Roman Emperor's
most splendid title, and was regularly used by the
barbarians when they referred to the Emperor.
The idea and the working out of the satire is
Lucianic and there are echoes here and there of
Lucian's <hi rend='italic'>Dialogues of the Dead</hi>, but Julian is
neither so witty nor so frivolous as Lucian. In
speaking of the gods he allows himself a licence
which is appropriate to the festival, but would
otherwise seem inconsistent with the admonitions
addressed to priests in the <hi rend='italic'>Fragment of a Letter</hi>.
His conception of the State and of the ideal ruler
is Greek rather than Roman.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='344'/><anchor id='Pg344'/><anchor id='Pg345'/>

<div>

<p>
ΙΟΥΛΙΑΝΟΥ ΑΥΤΟΚΡΑΤΟΡΟΣ
</p>

<p>
(Julian, Emperor)
</p>

<p>
ΣΥΜΠΟΣΙΟΝ Η ΚΡΟΝΙΑ
</p>

<p>
(The Caesars)
</p>

<p>
Ἐπειδὴ δίδωσιν ὁ θεὸς παίζειν· ἔστι γὰρ Κρόνια·
γελοῖον δὲ οὐδὲν οὐδὲ τερπνὸν οἶδα ἐγώ, τὸ μὴ
καταγέλαστα φράσαι φροντίδος ἔοικεν εἶναι ἄξιον,
ὦ φιλότης.
</p>

<p>
(<q>It is the season of the Kronia,<note place='foot'>Better known by its Latin name Saturnalia. Saturn is
the Greek Kronos.</note> during which the
god allows us to make merry. But, my dear friend,
as I have no talent for amusing or entertaining I
must methinks take pains not to talk mere nonsense.</q>)
</p>

<p>
Εἶτα τίς οὕτω παχύς ἐστι καὶ ἀρχαῖος, ὦ
Καῖσαρ, ὥστε καὶ παίζειν πεφροντισμένα; ἐγὼ
ᾤμην τὴν παιδιὰν ἄνεσίν τε εἶναι ψυχῆς καὶ
ἀπαλλαγὴν τῶν φροντίδων.
</p>

<p>
(<q>But, Caesar, can there be anyone so dull and
stupid as to take pains over his jesting? I always
thought that such pleasantries were a relaxation of
the mind and a relief from pains and cares.</q>)
</p>

<p>
[B] Ὀρθῶς γε σὺ τοῦτο ὑπολαμβάνων, ἐμοὶ δὲ
οὐ ταύτῃ ἔοικεν ἀπαντᾶν τὸ χρῆμα. πέφυκα γὰρ
οὐδαμῶς ἐπιτήδειος οὔτε σκώπτειν οὔτε παρῳδεῖν
οὔτε γελοιάζειν. ἐπεὶ δὲ χρὴ τῷ νόμῳ πείθεσθαι
τοῦ θεοῦ, βούλει σοι ἐν παιδιᾶς μέρει μῦθον διεξέλθω
πολλὰ ἴσως ἔχοντα ἀκονῆς ἄξια;
</p>

<p>
(<q>Yes, and no doubt your view is correct, but that
is not how the matter strikes me. For by nature I
have no turn for raillery, or parody, or raising a
laugh. But since I must obey the ordinance of the
god of the festival, should you like me to relate to
you by way of entertainment a myth in which there
is perhaps much that is worth hearing?</q>)
</p>

<p>
[C] Λέγοις ἂν καὶ μάλα ἀσμένῳ, ἐπεὶ καὶ αὐτὸς
οὐκ ἀτιμάζω τοὺς μύθους οὐδὲ παντάπασιν
ἐξελαύνω τοὺς ὀρθῶς ἔχοντας, ἀκόλουθά σοί
τε καὶ φίλῳ τῷ σῷ, μᾶλλον δὲ τῷ κοινῷ,
Πλάτωνι διανοούμενος, ἐπεὶ καὶ αὐτῷ πολλὰ
ἐν μύθοις ἐσπούδασται.
</p>

<p>
(<q>I shall listen with great pleasure, for I too am not
one to despise myths, and I am far from rejecting
those that have the right tendency; indeed I am of
the same opinion as you and your admired, or rather
the universally admired, Plato. He also often
conveyed a serious lesson in his myths.</q>)
</p>

<pb n='346'/><anchor id='Pg346'/><anchor id='Pg347'/>

<p>
Λέγεις ναὶ μὰ Δία ταῦτα ἀληθῆ.
</p>

<p>
(<q>By Zeus, that is true indeed!</q>)
</p>

<p>
Τίς δὲ καὶ ποταπὸς ὁ μῦθος;
</p>

<p>
(<q>But what is your myth and of what type?</q>)
</p>

<p>
[307] Οὐ τῶν παλαιῶν τις, ὁποίους Αἴσωπος ἐποίησεν,
ἀλλ᾽ εἴτε πλάσμα λέγοις Ἐρμοῦ· πεπυσμένος
γὰρ αὐτὸν ἐκεῖθέν σοι φράσω· εἴτε καὶ
τἀληθὲς οὕτως ἔχει εἴτε μίξις τίς ἐστιν ἀμφοῖν,
αὐτό, φασί,<note place='foot'>φασί Cobet, lacuna V., Hertlein, ἐπιδείξει MSS.</note> δείξει τὸ πράγμα.
</p>

<p>
(<q>Not one of those old-fashioned ones such as
Aesop<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> not a fable with a moral nor an animal fable.</note> wrote. But whether you should call mine an
invention of Hermes&mdash;for it was from him I learned
what I am going to tell you&mdash;or whether it is really
true or a mixture of truth and fiction, the upshot,
as the saying is, will decide.</q>)
</p>

<p>
Τουτὶ μὲν οὖν ἤδη μυθικῶς ἅμα καὶ ῥητορικῶς
ἐξείργασταί σοι τὸ προοίμιον· ἀλλά μοι τὸν
λόγον αὐτόν, ὁποῖός ποτέ ἐστιν, ἤδη διέξελθε.
</p>

<p>
(<q>This is indeed a fine preface that you have
composed, just the thing for a myth, not to say an
oration! But now pray tell me the tale itself, whatever
its type may be.</q>)
</p>

<p>
Μανθάνοις ἄν.
</p>

<p>
(<q>Attend.</q>)
</p>

<p>
[B] Θύων ὁ Ῥωμύλος τὰ Κρόνια πάντας ἐκάλει
τοὺς θεούς, καὶ δὴ καὶ αὐτοὺς<note place='foot'>αὐτοὺς Hertlein suspects to be an interpolation.</note> τοὺς καίσαρας.
κλῖναι δὲ ἐτύγχανον παρεσκευασμέναι τοῖς μὲν
θεοῖς ἄνω κατ᾽ αὐτό, φασίν, οὐρανοῦ τὸ μετέωρον,
</p>

<p>
(At the festival of the Kronia Romulus gave a
banquet, and invited not only all the gods, but the
Emperors as well. For the gods couches had been
prepared on high, at the very apex, so to speak, of
the sky,<note place='foot'>Cf. Plato, <hi rend='italic'>Phaedrus</hi> 247 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b</hi>.</note> on)
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<lg>
<l>Οὔλυμπόνδ᾽, ὅθι φασὶ θεῶν ἕδος ἀσφαλὲς αἰεί.</l>
</lg>

<p>
(<q>Olympus where they say is the seat of
the gods, unshaken for ever.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Odyssey</hi> 6. 42.</note>)
</p>

</quote>

<p>
λέγεται γὰρ μεθ᾽ Ἡρακλέα παρελθεῖν ἐκεῖσε
καὶ ὁ Κυρῖνος, ᾧ δὴ χρὴ καλεῖν αὐτὸν ὀνόματι,
τῇ θείᾳ πειθομένους φήμῃ. τοῖς μὲν οὖν θεοῖς
ἐκεῖσε παρεσκεύαστο τὸ συμπόσιον· [C] ὑπ᾽ αὐτὴν δὲ
τὴν σελήνην ἐπὶ μετεώρου τοῦ ἀέρος ἐδέδοκτο
τοὺς καίσαρας δειπνεῖν. ἀνεῖχε δὲ αὐτοὺς ἥ τε
τῶν σωμάτων κουφότης, ἅπερ ἐτύγχανον ἠμφιεσμένοι,
καὶ ἡ περιφορὰ τῆς σελήνης. κλῖναι μὲν
οὖν ἔκειντο τέτταρες, εὐτρεπεῖς τοῖς μεγίστοις
θεοῖς. ἐβένου μὲν ἦν ἡ τοῦ Κρόνου στιλβούσης
καὶ πολλὴν ἐν τῷ μέλανι καὶ θείαν αὐγὴν κρυπτούσης,
ὥστε οὐδεὶς οἷός τε ἦν ἀντιβλέπειν.
<pb n='348'/><anchor id='Pg348'/><anchor id='Pg349'/>
ἔπασχε δὲ ταὐτὸ [D] πρὸς τὴν ἔβενον ἐκείνην τὰ
ὄμματα δι᾽ ὑπερβολὴν τῆς λαμπηδόνος, ὅπερ οἶμαι
πρὸς ἥλιον, ὅταν αὐτοῦ τῷ δίσκῳ τις ἀτενέστερον
προσβλέπῃ. ἡ δὲ τοῦ Διὸς ἦν ἀργύρου μὲν
στιλπνοτέρα, χρυσίου δὲ λευκοτέρα. τοῦτο εἴτε
ἤλεκτρον χρὴ καλεῖν εἴτε ἄλλο τι λέγειν, οὐ
σφόδρα εἶχέ μοι γνωρίμως ὁ Ἑρμῆς φράσαι.
χρυσοθρόνω δὲ παρ᾽ ἑκάτερον ἐκαθεζέσθην<note place='foot'>ἐκαθεζέσθην Hertlein suggests, ἐκαθέζετον V., ἐκαθεζέτην
MSS.</note> ἥ τε
μήτηρ καὶ ἡ θυγάτηρ, [308] Ἥρα μὲν παρὰ τὸν Δία,
Ῥέα δὲ παρὰ τὸν Κρόνον. τὸ δὲ τῶν θεῶν κάλλος
οὐδὲ ἐκεῖνος ἐπεξῄει τῷ λόγῳ, μεῖζον εἶναι λέγων
αὐτὸ καὶ νῷ θεατόν, ἀκοῇ δὲ καὶ ῥήμασιν οὔτε
προοισθῆναι ῥᾴδιον οὔτε παραδεχθῆναι δυνατόν.
οὐχ οὕτω τις ἔσται καὶ φανεῖται μεγαλόφωνος,
ὥστε τὸ μέγεθος ἐκεῖνο φράσαι τοῦ κάλλους,
ὁπόσον ἐπιπρέπει τῇ τῶν θεῶν ὄψει.
</p>

<p>
(For we are told
that after Heracles, Quirinus also ascended thither,
since we must give Romulus the name of Quirinus
in obedience to the divine will.<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Oration</hi> 4. 149 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b</hi>, 154 <hi rend='smallcaps'>d</hi>.</note> For the gods
then the banquet had been made ready there.
But just below the moon in the upper air he had
decided to entertain the Emperors. The lightness
of the bodies with which they had been invested,
and also the revolution of the moon sustained
them. Four couches were there made ready
for the superior gods. That of Kronos was made
of gleaming ebony, which concealed in its blackness
a lustre so intense and divine that no one
could endure to gaze thereon. For in looking at
that ebony, the eyes suffered as much, methinks,
from its excess of radiance as from the sun when
one gazes too intently at his disc. The couch of
Zeus was more brilliant than silver, but paler than
gold; whether however one ought to call this
<q>electron,</q><note place='foot'>Cf. Martial 8. 51. 5: <q>Vera minus flavo radiant electra
metallo</q>; it is often uncertain whether electron means amber,
or a combination of 4/5 gold and 1/5 silver.</note> or to give it some other name, Hermes
could not inform me precisely. On either side of
these sat on golden thrones the mother and daughter,
Hera beside Zeus and Rhea beside Kronos. As for the
beauty of the gods, not even Hermes tried to describe
it in his tale; he said that it transcended description,
and must be comprehended by the eye of the
mind; for in words it was hard to portray and
impossible to convey to mortal ears. Never indeed
will there be or appear an orator so gifted that he
could describe such surpassing beauty as shines
forth on the countenances of the gods.)
</p>

<p>
[B] Παρεσκεύαστο δὲ καὶ τοῖς ἄλλοις θεοῖς ἑκάστῳ
θρόνος ἢ κλίνη κατὰ πρεσβείαν. ἤριζε δὲ οὐδείς,
ἀλλ᾽ ὅπερ Ὅμηρος ὀρθῶς ποιῶν ἔφη, δοκεῖν μοι
παρὰ τῶν Μουσῶν αὐτῶν ἀκηκοώς, ἔχειν ἕκαστον
τῶν θεῶν θρόνον, ἐφ᾽ οὗ πάντως αὐτῷ θέμις
καθῆσθαι στερεῶς καὶ ἀμετακινήτως· ἐπεὶ καὶ
πρὸς τὴν παρουσίαν τοῦ πατρὸς ἐξανιστάμενοι
ταράττουσιν οὐδαμῶς τὰς καθέδρας οὐδὲ μεταβαίνουσιν
οὐδὲ ὑφαρπάζουσιν ἀλλήλων, [C] γνωρίζει
δὲ ἕκαστος τὸ προσῆκον αὑτῷ. πάντων οὖν
κύκλῳ τῶν θεῶν καθημένων, ὁ Σειληνὸς ἐρωτικῶς
ἔχειν μοι δοκῶν τοῦ Διονύσου καλοῦ καὶ νέου καὶ
<pb n='350'/><anchor id='Pg350'/><anchor id='Pg351'/>
τῷ πατρὶ τῷ Διὶ παραπλησίου πλησίον αὐτοῦ,
τροφεύς τις οἷα καὶ παιδαγωγός, [D] καθῆστο, τά τε
ἄλλα φιλοπαίγμονα καὶ φιλόγελων καὶ χαριτοδότην<note place='foot'>χαριτοδότην Spanheim, cf. 148 <hi rend='smallcaps'>d</hi>, χαριδότην Hertlein, MSS.</note>
ὄντα τὸν θεὸν εὐφραίνων καὶ δὴ καὶ τῷ
σκώπτειν τὰ πολλὰ καὶ γελοιάζειν.
</p>

<p>
(For the other gods had been prepared a throne or
couch, for everyone according to seniority. Nor did
any dispute arise as to this, but as Homer said,<note place='foot'>This is not in our Homer, but Julian may have in mind
<hi rend='italic'>Iliad</hi> 11. 76.</note> and
correctly, no doubt instructed by the Muses themselves,
every god has his seat on which it is
irrevocably ordained that he shall sit, firmly and immovably
fixed; and though they rise on the entrance of
their father they never confound or change the order
of their seats or infringe on one another's, since
every one knows his appointed place.
Now when the gods were seated in a circle,
Silenus, amorous, methinks, of Dionysus ever fair and
ever young, who sat close to Zeus his father, took
his seat next to him on the pretext that he had
brought him up and was his tutor. And since
Dionysus loves jesting and laughter and is the giver
of the Graces, Silenus diverted the god with a
continual flow of sarcasms and jests, and in other
ways besides.)
</p>

<p>
Ὡς δὲ καὶ τὸ τῶν καισάρων συνεκεκρότητο<note place='foot'>συνεκεκρότητο Hertlein suggests, συνεκροτεῖτο MSS.</note>
συμπόσιον, εἰσῄει πρῶτος Ἰούλιος Καῖσαρ, ὑπὸ
φιλοτιμίας αὐτῷ βουλόμενος ἐρίσαι τῷ Διὶ περὶ
τῆς μοναρχίας, εἰς ὃν ὁ Σειληνὸς βλέψας, Ὅρα,
εἶπεν, ὦ Ζεῦ, μή σε ὁ ἀνὴρ οὗτος ὑπὸ φιλαρχίας
ἀφελέσθαι καὶ τὴν βασιλείαν διανοηθῇ. καὶ γὰρ,
ὡς ὁρᾷς, ἐστὶ μέγας καὶ καλός· ἐμοὶ γοῦν, εἰ καὶ
μηδὲν ἄλλο, [309] τὰ γοῦν περὶ τὴν κεφαλὴν ἐστι
προσόμοιος. παίζοντος ἔτι τοιαῦτα τοῦ Σειληνοῦ
καὶ τῶν θεῶν οὐ σφόδρα προσεχόντων αὐτῷ,
Ὀκταβιανὸς ἐπεισέρχεται πολλὰ ἀμείβων, ὥσπερ
οἱ χαμαιλέοντες, χρώματα καὶ νῦν μὲν ὠχριῶν,
αὖθις δὲ ἐρυθρὸς γινόμενος, εἶτα μέλας καὶ ζοφώδης
καὶ συννεφής· [B] ἀνίετο δ᾽ αὖθις εἰς Ἀφροδίτην
καὶ Χάριτας, εἶναί τε ἤθελε τὰς βολὰς τῶν
ὀμμάτων ὁποῖός ἐστιν ὁ μέγας Ἥλιος· οὐδένα
γάρ οἱ τῶν ἀπαντώντων<note place='foot'>ἀπαντώντων Spanheim, πάντων Hertlein, MSS.</note> ἀντιβλέπειν ἠξίου. καὶ
ὁ Σειληνός, Βαβαί, ἔφη, τοῦ παντοδαποῦ τούτου
θηρίου· τί ποτ᾽ ἄρα δεινὸν ἡμᾶς ἐργάσεται;
Παῦσαι, εἴπε, ληρῶν, ὁ Ἀπόλλων· ἐγὼ γὰρ
αὐτὸν τουτῳὶ Ζήνωνι παραδοὺς αὐτίκα ὑμῖν
ἀποφανῶ χρυσὸν ἀκήρατον. [C] ἀλλ᾽ ἴθι, εἶπεν, ὦ
Ζήνων, ἐπιμελήθητι τοὐμοῦ θρέμματος. ὁ δὲ
<pb n='352'/><anchor id='Pg352'/><anchor id='Pg353'/>
ὑπακούσας, εἶτα ἐπᾴσας αὐτῷ μικρὰ τῶν δογμάτων,
ὥσπερ οἱ τὰς Ζαμόλξιδος ἐπῳδὰς θρυλοῦντες,
ἀπέφηνεν ἄνδρα ἔμφρονα καὶ σώφρονα.
</p>

<p>
(When the banquet had been arranged for the
Emperors also, Julius Caesar entered first, and such
was his passion for glory that he seemed ready to
contend with Zeus himself for dominion. Whereupon
Silenus observing him said, <q>Take care, Zeus,
lest this man in his lust for power be minded to
rob you of your empire. He is, as you see, tall and
handsome, and if he resembles me in nothing else,
round about his head he is very like me.</q><note place='foot'>Silenus is usually represented as bald.</note> While
Silenus, to whom the gods paid very little attention,
was jesting thus, Octavian entered, changing colour
continually, like a chameleon, turning now pale now
red; one moment his expression was gloomy, sombre,
and overcast, the next he unbent and showed all the
charms of Aphrodite and the Graces. Moreover in
the glances of his eyes he was fain to resemble
mighty Helios, for he preferred that none who
approached should be able to meet his gaze.<note place='foot'>Suetonius, <hi rend='italic'>Augustus</hi> 16.</note> <q>Good
Heavens!</q> exclaimed Silenus, <q>what a changeable
monster is this! What mischief will he do us?</q>
<q>Cease trifling,</q> said Apollo, <q>after I have handed
him over to Zeno<note place='foot'>The Stoic philosopher.</note> here, I shall transform him for you
straightway to gold without alloy. Come, Zeno,</q> he
cried, <q>take charge of my nursling.</q> Zeno obeyed,
and thereupon, by reciting over Octavian a few of his
doctrines,<note place='foot'>Julian probably alludes to the influence on Augustus of
Athenodorus the Stoic.</note> in the fashion of those who mutter the
incantations of Zamolxis,<note place='foot'>A deity among the Thracians, who according to one tradition
had been a slave of Pythagoras; cf. Herodotus 4. 94;
Plato, <hi rend='italic'>Charmides</hi> 156 <hi rend='smallcaps'>d</hi>; Julian 8. 244 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a</hi>.</note> he made him wise and
temperate.)
</p>

<p>
Τρίτος ἐπεισέδραμεν αὐτοῖς Τιβέριος σεμνὸς τὰ
πρόσωπα καὶ βλοσυρός, σῶφρόν τε ἅμα καὶ
πολεμικὸν βλέπων. ἐπιστραφέντος δὲ πρὸς τὴν
καθέδραν ὤφθησαν ὠτειλαὶ κατὰ τὸν νῶτον μυρίαι,
καυτῆρές τινες [D] καὶ ξέσματα καὶ πληγαὶ χαλεπαὶ
καὶ μώλωπες ὑπό τε ἀκολασίας καὶ ὠμότητος
ψῶραί τινες καὶ λειχῆνες οἷον ἐγκεκαυμέναι. εἶθ᾽
ὁ Σειληνός
</p>

<p>
(The third to hasten in was Tiberius, with countenance
solemn and grim, and an expression at once
sober and martial. But as he turned to sit down
his back was seen to be covered with countless
scars, burns, and sores, painful welts and bruises,
while ulcers and abscesses were as though branded
thereon, the result of his self-indulgent and cruel
life.<note place='foot'>Cf. Plato, <hi rend='italic'>Gorgias</hi> 525 <hi rend='smallcaps'>d</hi>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>e</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>Republic</hi> 611 <hi rend='smallcaps'>c</hi>; Tacitus,
<hi rend='italic'>Annals</hi> 6. 6; Lucian, <hi rend='italic'>Cataplus</hi> 27.</note> Whereupon Silenus cried out,)
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<lg>
<l>Ἀλλοῖός μοι, ξεῖνε, φάνης νέον ἢ τὸ πάροιθεν</l>
</lg>

<p>
(<q>Far different,
friend, thou appearest now than before,</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Odyssey</hi> 16. 181; there is a play on the word πάροιθεν
which means also <q>in front.</q></note>)
</p>

</quote>

<p>
εἰπὼν ἔδοξεν αὑτοῦ φαίνεσθαι σπουδαιότερος.
καὶ ὁ Διόνυσος πρὸς αὐτόν, Τί δῆτα, εἶπεν, ὦ
παππίδιον σπουδάζεις; καὶ ὅς, Ἐξέπληξέ με ὁ
γέρων οὑτοσί, ὁ Σάτυρος, ἔφη, καὶ πεποίηκεν
ἐκλαθόμενον ἐμαυτοῦ τὰς Ὁμηρικὰς προβαλέσθαι
μούσας. [310] ἀλλά σε, εἶπεν, ἕλξει τῶν ὤτων·
λέγεται γὰρ αὐτὸς καὶ γραμματιστήν τινα τοῦτο
ἐργάσασθαι. οἰμώζων μὲν οὖν, εἶπεν, ἐν τῷ
νησυδρίῳ· τὰς Καπρέας αἰνιττόμενος· τὸν ἄθλιον
ἁλιέα ψηχέτω. ταῦτα ἔτι παιζόντων αὐτῶν,
ἐπεισέρχεται θηρίον πονηρόν. εἶτα οἱ θεοὶ
πάντες ἀπέστρεψαν τὰ ὄμματα, κᾆτα αὐτὸν
δίδωσιν ἡ Δίκη ταῖς Ποιναῖς, [B] αἱ δὲ ἔρριψαν εἰς
<pb n='354'/><anchor id='Pg354'/><anchor id='Pg355'/>
Τάρταρον. οὐδὲν οὖν ἔσχεν ὁ Σειληνὸς ὑπὲρ
αὐτοῦ φράσαι. τοῦ Κλαυδίου δὲ ἐπεισελθόντος,
ὁ Σειληνὸς ἄρχεται τοὺς Ἀριστοφάνους Ἱππέας
ᾄδειν, ἀντὶ τοῦ Δήμου<note place='foot'>Δήμου Cobet, δήμου Hertlein, MSS., Δημοσθένους Spanheim.</note> κολακεύων δῆθεν τὸν
Κλαύδιον. εἶτα πρὸς τὸν Κυρῖνον ἀπιδών, Ἀδικεῖς,
εἶπεν, ὦ Κυρῖνε, τὸν ἀπόγονον ἄγων εἰς τὸ
συμπόσιον δίχα τῶν ἀπελευθέρων Ναρκίσσου
καὶ Πάλλαντος. ἀλλ᾽ ἴθι, εἶπε, πέμψον ἐπ᾽ ἐκείνους,
εἰ βούλει δέ, καὶ ἐπὶ τὴν γαμετὴν Μεσσαλίναν.
ἔστι γὰρ ἐκείνων [C] δίχα τουτὶ τῆς τραγωιδίας
τὸ δορυφόρημα, μικροῦ δέω φάναι, καὶ
ἄψυχον. ἐπεισέρχεται λέγοντι τῷ Σειληνῷ
Νέρων μετὰ τῆς κιθάρας καὶ τῆς δάφνης. εἶτα
ἀποβλέψας ἐκεῖνος πρὸς τὸν Ἀπόλλωνα, Οὗτος,
εἶπεν, ἐπὶ σὲ παρασκευάζεται. καὶ ὁ βασιλεὺς
Ἀπόλλων, Ἀλλ᾽ ἔγωγε αὐτόν, εἶπεν, ἀποστεφανώσω,
ὅτι με μὴ πάντα μιμεῖται μηδὲ ἐν οἷς
με μιμεῖται γίγνεται μου μιμητὴς δίκαιος. ἀποστεφανωθέντα
δὲ αὐτὸν ὁ Κωκυτὸς εὐθέως
ἥρπασεν.
</p>

<p>
(and
seemed more serious than was his wont. <q>Pray,
why so solemn, little father?</q> said Dionysus. <q>It
was this old satyr,</q> he replied, <q>he shocked me and
made me forget myself and introduce Homer's
Muse.</q> <q>Take care,</q> said Dionysus, <q>he will pull
your ear, as he is said to have done to a certain
grammarian.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> Seleucus; cf. Suetonius, <hi rend='italic'>Tiberius</hi> 56, 70.</note> <q>Plague take him,</q> said Silenus, <q>in
his little island</q>&mdash;he was alluding to Capri&mdash;<q>let
him scratch the face of that wretched fisherman.</q><note place='foot'>Suetonius, <hi rend='italic'>Tiberius</hi> 60.</note>
While they were still joking together, there came
in a fierce monster.<note place='foot'>Caligula.</note> Thereupon all the gods turned
away their eyes from the sight, and next moment
Justice handed him over to the Avengers who
hurled him into Tartarus. So Silenus had no chance
to say anything about him. But when Claudius
came in Silenus began to sing some verses from the
<hi rend='italic'>Knights</hi> of Aristophanes,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Knights</hi> 1111 foll.</note> toadying Claudius, as it
seemed, instead of Demos. Then he looked at Quirinus
and said, <q>Quirinus, it is not kind of you to invite
your descendant to a banquet without his freedmen
Narcissus and Pallas.<note place='foot'>Their riches were proverbial, cf. Juvenal 1. 109; 14. 32.</note> Come,</q> he went on, <q>send
and fetch them, and please send too for his spouse
Messalina, for without them this fellow is like a
lay-figure in a tragedy, I might almost say lifeless.</q><note place='foot'>Tacitus, <hi rend='italic'>Annals</hi> 11. 12; Juvenal 10. 330 foll.</note>
While Silenus was speaking Nero entered, lyre in
hand and wearing a wreath of laurel. Whereupon
Silenus turned to Apollo and said, <q>You see he
models himself on you.</q> <q>I will soon take off that
wreath,</q> replied Apollo, <q>for he does not imitate
me in all things, and even when he does he does it
badly.</q> Then his wreath was taken off and Cocytus
instantly swept him away.)
</p>

<p>
[D] Ἐπὶ τούτῳ πολλοὶ καὶ παντοδαποὶ συνέτρεχον,
Βίνδικες, Γάλβαι, Ὄθωνες, Βιτέλλιοι. καὶ ὁ
Σειληνός, Τούτων, εἶπε, τῶν μονάρχων τὸ σμῆνος<note place='foot'>τὸ σμῆνος Hertlein suggests, τὸν δῆμον MSS.</note>
πόθεν ἐξηυρήκατε, ὦ θεοί; τυφόμεθα γοῦν ὑπὸ
τοῦ καπνοῦ· φείδεται γὰρ οὐδὲ τῶν ἀνακτόρων
ταυτὶ τὰ θηρία. καὶ ὁ Ζεὺς ἀπιδὼν πρὸς τὸν
ἀδελφὸν αὑτοῦ [311] Σάραπιν καὶ τὸν Οὐεσπασιανὸν
δείξας, Πέμπε, εἶπε, τὸν σμικρίνην· τοῦτον ἀπὸ
τῆς Αἰγύπτου ταχέως, ἵνα τὴν φλόγα ταύτην
κατασβέσῃ· τῶν παίδων δὲ τὸν πρεσβύτερον
<pb n='356'/><anchor id='Pg356'/><anchor id='Pg357'/>
μὲν παίζειν κέλευε μετὰ τῆς Ἀφροδίτης τῆς
πανδήμου, τὸν νεώτερον δὲ τῷ Σικελικῷ θηρίῳ
παραπλησίως κλοιῷ δῆσον. παρῆλθεν ἐπὶ τούτοις
γέρων ὀφθῆναι καλός· λάμπει γὰρ ἔστιν ὅτε
καὶ ἐν τῷ γήρᾳ τὸ κάλλος· ἐντυχεῖν πρᾳότατος,
χρηματίσαι δικαιότατος. [B] ᾐδέσθη τοῦτον ὁ Σειληνὸς
καὶ ἀπεσιώπησεν. εἶτα ὁ Ἑρμῆς, Ὕπὲρ
δὲ τούτου, εἶπεν, οὐδὲν ἡμῖν λέγεις; Ναὶ μὰ
Δί᾽, ἔφη, μέμφομαί γε ὑμῖν τῆς ἀνισότητος.
τῷ γὰρ φονικῷ θηρίῳ τρὶς πέντε νείμαντες
ἐνιαυτοὺς ἕνα μόλις ἐδώκατε τούτῳ βασιλεῦσαι.
Ἀλλὰ μὴ μέμφου, εἶπεν ὁ Ζεύς· [C] εἰσάξω γὰρ
ἐπὶ τούτῳ πολλοὺς κἈγαθούς. εὐθέως οὖν ὁ
Τραïανὸς εἰσήρχετο φέρων ἐπὶ τῶν ὤμων τὰ
τρόπαια, τό τε Γετικὸν καὶ τὸ Παρθικόν. ἰδὼν
δὲ αὐτὸν ὁ Σειληνὸς ἔφη, λανθάνειν τε ἅμα καὶ
ἀκούεσθαι βουλόμενος. Ὥρα νῦν τῷ δεσπότῃ Διὶ
σκοπεῖν, ὅπως ὁ Γανυμήδης αὐτῷ φρουρήσεται.
</p>

<p>
(After Nero many Emperors of all sorts came
crowding in together, Vindex, Galba, Otho, Vitellius,
so that Silenus exclaimed, <q>Where, ye gods, have ye
found such a swarm of monarchs? We are being
suffocated with their smoke; for brutes of this sort
spare not even the temple of the gods.</q><note place='foot'>An allusion partly to the smoke of civil war, partly to
the burning of the temple of Jupiter Capitoline under
Vitellius; the temple was restored by Vespasian; Tacitus,
<hi rend='italic'>Annals</hi> 4. 81.</note> Then Zeus
turned to his brother Serapis, and pointing to Vespasian
said, <q>Send this niggard from Egypt forthwith
to extinguish the flames. As for his sons, bid the
eldest<note place='foot'>Titus.</note> sport with Aphrodite Pandemos and chain the
younger<note place='foot'>Domitian.</note> in the stocks like the Sicilian monster.</q><note place='foot'>Phalaris of Agrigentum.</note>
Next entered an old man,<note place='foot'>Nerva.</note> beautiful to behold; for
even old age can be radiantly beautiful. Very mild
were his manners, most just his dealings. In Silenus
he inspired such awe that he fell silent. <q>What!</q>
said Hermes, <q>have you nothing to say to us about
this man?</q> <q>Yes, by Zeus,</q> he replied, <q>I blame
you gods for your unfairness in allowing that blood-thirsty
monster to rule for fifteen years, while you
granted this man scarce one whole year.</q> <q>Nay,</q>
said Zeus, <q>do not blame us. For I will bring in
many virtuous princes to succeed him.</q> Accordingly
Trajan entered forthwith, carrying on his shoulders
the trophies of his wars with the Getae and the
Parthians. Silenus, when he saw him, said in a
whisper which he meant to be heard, <q>Now is the
time for Zeus our master to look out, if he wants to
keep Ganymede for himself.</q>)
</p>

<p>
Μετὰ τοῦτον ἐπεισέρχεται βαθεῖαν ἔχων τὴν
ὑπήνην ἀνὴρ σοβαρὸς τά τε ἄλλα [D] καὶ δὴ καὶ
μουσικὴν ἐργαζόμενος, εἴς τε τὸν οὐρανὸν ἀφορῶν
πολλάκις καὶ πολυπραγμονῶν τὰ ἀπόρρητα.
τοῦτον δὲ ἰδὼν ὁ Σειληνὸς ἔφη, Τί δὲ ὑμῖν οὗτος
ὁ σοφιστὴς δοκεῖ; μῶν Ἀντίνοον τῇδε περισκοπεῖ;
φρασάτω τις αὐτῷ μὴ παρεῖναι τὸ
μειράκιον ἐνθαδὶ καὶ παυσάτω τοῦ λήρου καὶ
τῆς φλυαρίας αὐτόν. [312] ἐπὶ τούτοις ἀνὴρ εἰσέρχεται
σώφρων, οὐ τὰ ἐς Ἀφροδίτην, ἀλλὰ τὰ ἐς τὴν
πολιτείαν. ἰδὼν αὐτὸν ὁ Σειληνὸς ἔφη, Βαβαὶ
τῆς σμικρολογίας· εἷς εἶναί μοι δοκεῖ τῶν
διαπριόντων τὸ κύμινον ὁ πρεσβύτης οὗτος.
ἐπεισελθούσης δὲ αὐτῷ τῆς τῶν ἀδελφῶν ξυνωρίδος,
<pb n='358'/><anchor id='Pg358'/><anchor id='Pg359'/>
Βήρου καὶ Λουκίου, δεινῶς ὁ Σειληνὸς
συνεστάλη, παίζειν γὰρ οὐκ εἶχεν οὐδ᾽ ἐπισκώπτειν,
μάλιστα τὸν Βῆρον, καίτοι καὶ τούτου
τὰ περὶ τὸν οἱὸν καὶ τὴν γυναῖκα πολυπραγμονῶν
ἁμαρτήματα, [B] τὴν μὲν ὅτι πλέον ἢ προσῆκεν
ἐπένθησεν, ἄλλως τε οὐδὲ κοσμίαν οὖσαν, τῷ
δὲ ὅτι τὴν ἀρχὴν συναπολλυμένην περιεῖδεν,
ἔχων καὶ ταῦτα σπουδαῖον κηδεστήν, ὃς τῶν
τε κοινῶν ἂν προύστη κρεῖττον καὶ δὴ καὶ τοῦ
παιδὸς αὐτοῦ βέλτιον ἂν ἐπεμελήθη ἢ αὐτὸς
αὑτοῦ. καίπερ οὖν ταῦτα πολυπραγμονῶν ᾐδεῖτο
τὸ μέγεθος αὐτοῦ τῆς ἀρετῆς· τόν γε μὴν υἱέα
οὐδὲ [C] τοῦ σκωφθῆναι νομίσας ἄξιον ἀφῆκεν·
ἔπιπτε γὰρ καὶ αὐτὸς εἰς γῆν οὐ δυνάμενος
ἵστασθαι<note place='foot'>ἵστασθαι Cobet, ἵπτασθαι Hertlein, MSS.</note> καὶ παρομαρτεῖν τοῖς ἥρωσιν.
</p>

<p>
(Next entered an austere-looking man<note place='foot'>Hadrian.</note> with a
long beard, an adept in all the arts, but especially
music, one who was always gazing at the heavens
and prying into hidden things. Silenus when he
saw him said, <q>What think ye of this sophist?
Can he be looking here for Antinous? One of you
should tell him that the youth is not here, and make
him cease from his madness and folly.</q> Thereupon
entered a man<note place='foot'>Antoninus Pius.</note> of temperate character, I do not
say in love affairs but in affairs of state. When
Silenus caught sight of him he exclaimed, <q>Bah!
Such fussing about trifles! This old man seems to
me the sort of person who would split cumin seed.</q><note place='foot'>A proverb for niggardliness; cf. Theocritus 10. 50.</note>
Next entered the pair of brothers, Verus<note place='foot'>Verus was the family name of Marcus Aurelius.</note> and
Lucius.<note place='foot'>Lucius Verus.</note> Silenus scowled horribly because he could
not jeer or scoff at them, especially not at Verus;
but he would not ignore his errors of judgment in
the case of his son<note place='foot'>Commodus.</note> and his wife,<note place='foot'>Faustina.</note> in that he
mourned the latter beyond what was becoming,
especially considering that she was not even a virtuous
woman; and he failed to see that his son was
ruining the empire as well as himself, and that
though Verus had an excellent son-in-law who would
have administered the state better, and besides
would have managed the youth better than he could
manage himself. But though he refused to ignore
these errors he reverenced the exalted virtue of
Verus. His son however he considered not worth
even ridicule and so let him pass. Indeed he fell to
earth of his own accord because he could not keep
on his feet or accompany the heroes.)
</p>

<p>
Ἐπεισέρχεται Περτίναξ τῷ συμποσίῳ τὴν
σφαγὴν ὀδυρόμενος. ἡ Δίκη δὲ αὐτὸν κατελεήσασα,
Ἀλλ᾽ οὐ χαιρήσουσιν, εἶπεν, οἱ τούτων
αἴτιοι· καὶ σὺ δέ, ὦ Περτίναξ, ἠδίκεις κοινωνῶν
τῆς ἐπιβουλῆς, ὅσον ἐπὶ τοῖς σκέμμασιν, ἣν
ὁ Μάρκου παῖς ἐπεβουλεύθη. [D] μετὰ τοῦτον ὁ
Σεβῆρος, ἀνὴρ πικρίας γέμων καὶ<note place='foot'>καὶ before κολαστικός Hertlein suggests.</note> κολαστικός.
Ὑπὲρ τούτου δέ, εἶπεν ὁ Σειληνός, οὐδὲν λέγω·
φοβοῦμαι γὰρ αὐτοῦ τὸ λίαν ἀπηνὲς καὶ ἀπαραίτητον.
ὡς δὲ ἔμελλεν αὐτῷ καὶ τὰ παιδάρια<note place='foot'>παιδάρια Cobet, MSS., παιδαρίδια Hertlein, V., m.</note>
συνεισιέναι, πόρρωθεν αὐτὰ διεκώλυσεν ὁ Μίνως.
ἐπιγνοὺς δὲ σαφῶς τὸν μὲν νεώτερον ἀφῆκε, τὸν
<pb n='360'/><anchor id='Pg360'/><anchor id='Pg361'/>
δὲ πρεσβύτερον τιμωρίαν ἔπεμψε τίσοντα. [313] Μακρῖνος
ἐνταῦθα φυγὰς μιαιφόνος· εἶτα τὸ ἐκ τῆς
Ἐμέσης παιδάριον πόρρω που τῶν ἱερῶν ἀπηλαύνετο
περιβόλων. ὅ γε μὴν Σύρος Ἀλέξανδρος
ἐν ἐσχάτοις που καθῆστο τὴν αὑτοῦ συμφορὰν
ποτνιώμενος. καὶ ὁ Σειληνὸς ἐπισκώπτων αὐτὸν
εἶπεν<note place='foot'>εἶπεν Hertlein suggests, ἐπεῖπεν MSS.</note> Ὦ μῶρε καὶ μέγα νήπιε, τηλικοῦτος ὢν
οὐκ αὐτὸς ἦρχες τῶν σεαυτοῦ, τὰ χρήματα δὲ
ἐδίδους τῇ μητρὶ [B] καὶ οὐκ ἐπείσθης, ὅσῳ κρεῖττον
ἀναλίσκειν ἦν αὐτὰ τοῖς φίλοις ἢ θησαυρίζειν.
Ἀλλ᾽ ἔγωγε, εἶπεν ἡ Δίκη, πάντας αὐτούς, ὅσοι
μεταίτιοι γεγόνασι τούτων, κολασθησομένους
παραδώσω. καὶ οὕτως ἀνείθη τὸ μειράκιον. ἐπὶ
τούτῳ παρῆλθεν εἴσω Γαλλιῆνος μετὰ τοῦ πατρός,
ὁ μὲν τὰ δεσμὰ τῆς αἰχμαλωσίας ἔχων,
ὁ δὲ στολῇ τε [C] καὶ κινήσει χρώμενος μαλακωτέρᾳ
ὥσπερ αἱ γυναῖκες. καὶ ὁ Σειληνὸς πρὸς μὲν
ἐκεῖνον,
</p>

<p>
(Then Pertinax came in to the banquet still
bewailing his violent end. But Justice took pity
on him and said, <q>Nay, the authors of this deed
shall not long exult. But Pertinax, you too were
guilty, since at least so far as conjecture went you
were privy to the plot that was aimed at the son of
Marcus.</q> Next came Severus, a man of excessively
harsh temper and delighting to punish. <q>Of him,</q>
said Silenus, <q>I have nothing to say, for I am
terrified by his forbidding and implacable looks.</q>
When his sons would have entered with him, Minos
kept them at a distance. However, when he had
clearly discerned their characters, he let the
younger<note place='foot'>Geta.</note> pass, but sent away the elder<note place='foot'>Caracalla.</note> to atone
for his crimes. Next Macrinus, assassin and fugitive,
and after him the pretty boy from Emesa<note place='foot'>Heliogabalus; cf. <hi rend='italic'>Oration</hi> 4. 150 <hi rend='smallcaps'>d</hi>, note.</note> were driven
far away from the sacred enclosure. But Alexander
the Syrian sat down somewhere in the lowest ranks
and loudly lamented his fate.<note place='foot'>Alexander Severus was assassinated in 235 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi></note> Silenus made fun of
him and exclaimed, <q>O fool and madman! Exalted
as you were you could not govern your own family,
but gave your revenues to your mother:<note place='foot'>Mammaea.</note> nor could
you be persuaded how much better it was to bestow
them on your friends than to hoard them.</q> <q>I
however,</q> said Justice, <q>will consign to torment all
who were accessory to his death.</q> And then the
youth was left in peace. Next entered Gallienus
and his father,<note place='foot'>Valerian died in captivity among the Persians.</note> the latter still dragging the chains
of his captivity, the other with the dress and languishing
gait of a woman. Seeing Valerian, Silenus
cried,)
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<lg>
<l>Τίς οὗτος ὁ λευκολόφας,</l>
<l>Πρόπαρ ὃς ἡγεῖται στρατοῦ;</l>
</lg>

<p>
(<q>Who is this with the white plume that leads
the army's van?</q><note place='foot'>Euripides, <hi rend='italic'>Phoenissae</hi> 120.</note>)
</p>

</quote>

<p>
ἔφη, πρὸς δὲ τὸν Γαλλιῆνον,
</p>

<p>
(Then he greeted Gallienus with,)
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<lg>
<l>Ὃς καὶ χρυσὸν ἔχων πάντη τρυφᾷ ἠύτε κούρη·</l>
</lg>

<p>
(<q>He who is all decked with gold and dainty as a
maiden.</q><note place='foot'>Slightly altered from <hi rend='italic'>Iliad</hi> 2. 872.</note>)
</p>

</quote>

<p>
τούτω δὲ ὁ Ζεὺς εἶπε τῆς ἐκεῖσε θοίνης ἐκβῆναι.
</p>

<p>
(But Zeus ordered the pair to depart
from the feast.)
</p>

<p>
[D] Τούτοις ἐπεισέρχεται Κλαύδιος, εἰς ὃν ἀπιδόντες
οἱ θεοὶ πάντες ἠγάσθησάν τε αὐτὸν τῆς
μεγαλοψυχίας καὶ ἐπένευσαν αὐτοῦ τῷ γένει τὴν
ἀρχήν, δίκαιον εἶναι νομίσαντες οὕτω φιλοπάτριδος
ἀνδρὸς ἐπὶ πλεῖστον εἶναι τὸ γένος ἐν ἡγεμονίᾳ.
τούτοις ἐπεισέδραμεν Αὐρηλιανὸς ὥσπερ
ἀποδιδράσκων τοὺς εἴργοντας αὐτὸν παρὰ τῷ
<pb n='362'/><anchor id='Pg362'/><anchor id='Pg363'/>
Μίνωι· πολλαὶ γὰρ αὐτῷ συνίσταντο δίκαι τῶν
ἀδίκων φόνων, καὶ ἔφευγε τὰς γραφὰς κακῶς
ἀπολογούμενας. [314] Ἥλιος δὲ οὑμὸς δεσπότης αὐτῷ
πρὸς τε τὰ ἄλλα βοηθῶν, οὐχ ἥκιστα δὲ καὶ
πρὸς τοῦτο αὐτὸ συνήρατο, φράσας ἐν τοῖς θεοῖς,
Ἀλλ᾽ ἀπέτισε τὴν δίκην, ἢ λέληθεν ἡ δοθεῖσα
Δελφοῖς μαντεία
</p>

<p>
(Next came Claudius,<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Oration</hi> 1. 6 <hi rend='smallcaps'>d</hi>.</note> at whom all the gods gazed,
and admiring his greatness of soul granted the empire
to his descendants, since they thought it just that
the posterity of such a lover of his country should
rule as long as possible. Then Aurelian came rushing
in as though trying to escape from those who
would detain him before the judgment seat of Minos.
For many charges of unjustifiable murders were
brought against him, and he was in flight because
he could ill defend himself against the indictments.
But my lord Helios<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Oration</hi> 4. 155 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b</hi>.</note> who had assisted him on other
occasions, now too came to his aid and declared
before the gods,)
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<lg>
<l>Αἴκε πάθῃ τά τ᾽ ἔρεξε, δίκη κ᾽ ἰθεῖα γένοιτο;</l>
</lg>

<p>
(<q>He has paid the penalty, or have
you forgotten the oracle uttered at Delphi, <q>If
his punishment match his crime justice has been
done</q>?</q><note place='foot'>An oracular verse ascribed to Rhadamanthus by Aristotle,
<hi rend='italic'>Nic. Ethics</hi> 5. 5. 3; attributed to Hesiod, <hi rend='italic'>Fragments</hi>
150 Goettling; it became a proverb.</note>)
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Τούτῳ συνεισέρχεται Πρόβος, ὃς ἑβδομήκοντα
πόλεις ἀναστήσας [B] ἐν οὐδὲ ὅλοις ἐνιαυτοῖς ἑπτὰ
καὶ πολλὰ πάνυ σωφρόνως οἰκονομήσας, ἄδικα δὲ
πεπονθὼς ὑπὸ τῶν ἀθέων, ἐτιμᾶτο τά τε ἄλλα
καὶ τῷ τοὺς φονέας αὐτῷ τὴν δίκην ἐκτῖσαι.
σκώπτειν δὲ αὐτὸν ὅμως ὁ Σειληνὸς ἐπειρᾶτο,
καίτοι πολλῶν αὐτῷ σιωπᾶν παρακελευομένων·
ἀλλ᾽, Ἐᾶτε, ἔφη, νῦν γοῦν δι᾽ αὐτοῦ τοὺς ἑξῆς
φρενωθῆναι. [C] οὐκ οἶσθα, ὦ Πρόβε, ὅτι τὰ πικρὰ
φάρμακα μιγνύντες οἱ ἰατροὶ τῷ μελικράτῳ προσφέρουσι;
σὺ δὲ αὐστηρὸς ἦσθα λίαν καὶ τραχὺς
ἀεὶ εἴκων τε οὐδαμοῦ· πέπονθας οὖν ἄδικα μέν,
εἰκότα δὲ ὅμως. οὐ γὰρ ἔστιν οὔτε ἵππων οὔτε
βοῶν ἄρχειν οὔτε ἡμιόνων, ἥκιστα δὲ ἀνθρώπων,
μή τι καὶ τῶν κεχαρισμένων αὐτοῖς ξυγχωροῦντα,
ὥσπερ ἔσθ᾽ ὅτε τοῖς ἀσθενοῦσιν οἱ ἰατροὶ μικρὰ
ἐνδιδόασιν, [D] ἵν᾽ ἐν τοῖς μείζοσιν ἔχωσιν αὐτοὺς
πειθομένους. Τί τοῦτο, εἶπεν ὁ Διόνυσος, ὦ παππία;
φιλόσοφος ἡμῖν ἀνεφάνης; οὐ γάρ, ὦ παῖ,
<pb n='364'/><anchor id='Pg364'/><anchor id='Pg365'/>
ἔφη, καὶ σὺ φιλόσοφος ὑπ᾽ ἐμοῦ γέγονας; οὐκ
οἶσθα, ὅτι καὶ ὁ Σωκράτης, ἐοικὼς ἐμοί, τὰ
πρωτεῖα κατὰ τὴν φιλοσοφίαν ἀπηνέγκατο τῶν
καθ᾽ ἑαυτὸν ἀνθρώπων, εἰ τἀδελφῷ πιστεύεις ὅτι
ἐστὶν ἀψευδής; ἔα τοίνυν ἡμᾶς μὴ πάντα γελοῖα
λέγειν, ἀλλὰ καὶ σπουδαῖα.
</p>

<p>
(With Aurelian entered Probus, who in less than
seven years restored seventy cities and was in many
ways a wise administrator. Since he had been unjustly
treated by impious men the gods paid him
honours, and moreover exacted the penalty from his
assassins. For all that, Silenus tried to jest at his
expense, though many of the gods urged him to be
silent. In spite of them he called out, <q>Now let
those that follow him learn wisdom from his example.
Probus, do you not know that when physicians give
bitter medicines they mix them with honey?<note place='foot'>Plato, <hi rend='italic'>Laws</hi> 659 <hi rend='smallcaps'>e</hi>; a rhetorical commonplace; Themistius
63 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b</hi>.</note> But
you were always too austere and harsh and never
displayed toleration. And so your fate, though
unjust, was natural enough. For no one can govern
horses or cattle or mules, still less men, unless he
sometimes yields to them and gratifies their wishes;
just as physicians humour their patients in trifles so
that they may make them obey in things more
essential.</q> <q>What now, little father,</q> exclaimed
Dionysus, <q>have you turned up as our philosopher?</q>
<q>Why, my son,</q> he replied, <q>did I not make a
philosopher of you? Do you not know that Socrates
also, who was so like me,<note place='foot'>Cf. Plato, <hi rend='italic'>Symposium</hi> 215; cf. Julian, <hi rend='italic'>Oration</hi> 6. 187 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a</hi>.</note> carried off the prize for
philosophy from his contemporaries, at least if you
believe that your brother<note place='foot'>A reference to the oracle of Apollo which declared that
Socrates was the wisest man of his times.</note> tells the truth? So you
must allow me to be serious on occasion and not
always jocose.</q>)
</p>

<p>
[315] Ἔτι διαλεγομένων αὐτῶν πρὸς ἀλλήλους, ὄ τε
Κᾶρος ἅμα τοῖς παισὶν εἰσφρῆσαι βουληθεὶς εἰς
τὸ συμπόσιον ἀπελήλατο παρὰ τῆς Δίκης, καὶ ὁ
Διοκλητιανός, ἄγων μεθ᾽ ἑαυτοῦ Μαξιμιανώ τε τὼ
δύο καὶ τὸν ἐμὸν πάππον Κωνστάντιον, ἐν κόσμῳ
προῆγεν. εἴχοντο δὲ ἀλλήλων τὼ χεῖρε, καὶ
ἐβάδιζον οὐκ ἐξ ἴσης, ἀλλ᾽ οἷα χορός τις ἦν περὶ
αὐτόν, [B] τῶν μὲν ὥσπερ δορυφορούντων καὶ προθεῖν
αὐτοῦ βουλομένων, τοῦ δὲ εἴργοντος· οὐδὲν γὰρ
ἠξίου πλεονεκτεῖν. ὡς δὲ ξυνίει κάμνοντος ἑαυτοῦ,
δοὺς αὐτοῖς ἅπαντα, ὅσα ἔφερεν ἐπὶ τῶν ὤμων,
αὐτὸς εὔλυτος ἐβάδιζεν. ἠγάσθησαν οἱ θεοὶ τῶν
ἀνδρῶν τὴν ὁμόνοιαν, καὶ ἐπέτρεψαν αὐτοῖς πρὸ
πολλῶν πάνυ καθῆσθαι. δεινῶς δὲ ὄντα τὸν
Μαξιμιανὸν ἀκόλαστον ὁ Σειληνὸς ἐπισκώπτειν
μὲν οὐκ ἠξίου, [C] τὸ δὲ τῶν βασιλέων οὐκ εἰσεδέχετο
συσσίτιον. οὐ γὰρ μόνον τὰ εἰς Ἀφροδίτην ἦν
παντοίαν ἀσέλγειαν ἀσελγής, ἀλλὰ καὶ φιλοπράγμων
καὶ ἄπιστος καὶ οὐ τὰ πάντα τῷ τετραχόρδῳ
συνῳδῶν. ἐξήλασεν οὖν αὐτὸν ἡ Δίκη ταχέως.
εἶτα ἀπῆλθεν οὐκ οἶδα ὅποι γῆς· ἐπελαθόμην γὰρ
αὐτὸ παρὰ τοῦ Ἑρμοῦ πολυπραγμονῆσαι. τούτῳ
δὲ τῷ παναρμονίῳ τετραχόρδῳ παραφύεται δεινὸν
<pb n='366'/><anchor id='Pg366'/><anchor id='Pg367'/>
καὶ τραχὺ καὶ ταραχῶδες σύστημα. [D] τοὺς μὲν οὖν
δύο οὐδὲ τῶν προθύρων ἅψασθαι τῆς τῶν ἡρώων
ἀγορᾶς ἡ Δίκη συνεχώρησε, Λικίνιον δὲ μέχρι τῶν
προθύρων ἐλθόντα, πολλὰ καὶ ἅτοπα πλημμελοῦντα
ταχέως ὁ Μίνως ἐξήλασεν. ὁ Κωνσταντῖνος
δὲ παρῆλθεν εἴσω καὶ πολὺν ἐκαθέσθη
χρόνον, εἶτα μετ᾽ αὐτὸν τὰ παιδία. Μαγνεντίῳ
γὰρ οὐκ ἦν εἴσοδος, [316] ὅτι μηδὲν ὑγιὲς ἐπεπράχει,
καίτοι πολλὰ ἐδόκει πεπρᾶχθαι τῷ ἀνδρὶ καλά· οἱ
θεοὶ δὲ ὁρῶντες, ὅτι μὴ ταῦτα ἐκ καλῆς αὐτῷ
πεποίηται διαθέσεως, εἴων αὐτὸν οἰμώζειν ἀποτρέχοντα.
</p>

<p>
(While they were talking, Carus and his sons tried
to slip into the banquet, but Justice drove them
away. Next Diocletian advanced in pomp, bringing
with him the two Maximians and my grandfather
Constantius.<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Oration</hi> 1. 7 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a</hi>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>b</hi>.</note> These latter held one another by the
hand and did not walk alongside of Diocletian, but
formed a sort of chorus round him. And when they
wished to run before him as a bodyguard he prevented
them, since he did not think himself entitled
to more privileges than they. But when he realised
that he was growing weary he gave over to them all
the burdens that he carried on his shoulders, and
thereafter walked with greater ease. The gods
admired their unanimity and permitted them to sit
far in front of many of their predecessors. Maximian
was so grossly intemperate that Silenus wasted no
jests on him, and he was not allowed to join the
emperors at their feast. For not only did he indulge
in vicious passions of all sorts, but proved meddlesome
and disloyal and often introduced discord into
that harmonious quartette. Justice therefore banished
him without more ado. So he went I know not
whither, for I forgot to interrogate Hermes on this
point. However into that harmonious symphony of
four there crept a terribly harsh and discordant strain.
For this reason Justice would not suffer the two<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> the two Maximians, the colleagues of Diocletian.</note> so
much as to approach the door of that assembly of
heroes. As for Licinius, he came as far as the door,
but as his misdeeds were many and monstrous Minos
forthwith drove him away. Constantine however
entered and sat some time, and then came his sons.<note place='foot'>Constantine II, Constans and Constantius.</note>
Magnentius<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Oration</hi> 1. 31, 33 foll.</note> was refused admission because he had
never done anything really laudable, though much
that he achieved had the appearance of merit. So
the gods, who perceived that these achievements
were not based on any virtuous principle, sent him
packing, to his deep chagrin.)
</p>

<p>
Οὔσης δὴ τοιαύτης τῆς ἀμφὶ τὸ δεῖπνον παρασκευῆς,
ἐπόθουν μὲν οὐδὲν οἱ θεοί, πάντα γὰρ
ἔχουσιν, αὐτῶν δὲ τῶν ἡρώων ἐδόκει τῷ Ἑρμῇ
διαπειρᾶσθαι, καὶ τῷ Διὶ τοῦτο οὐκ ἀπὸ γνώμης
ἦν. ἐδεῖτο δὲ καὶ ὁ Κυρῖνος ἤδη τινὰ μετάγειν
ἐκεῖθεν παρ᾽ ἑαυτόν. Ἡρακλῆς δὲ εἶπεν, [B] Οὐκ
ἀνέξομαι, ὦ Κυρῖνε· διὰ τί γὰρ οὐχὶ καὶ τὸν ἐμὸν
Ἀλέξανδρον ἐπὶ τὸ δεῖπνον παρεκάλεις; σοῦ
τοίνυν, εἶπεν, ὦ Ζεῦ, δέομαι, εἴ τινα τούτων
ἔγνωκας ἄγειν πρὸς ἡμᾶς, ἥκειν τὸν Ἀλέξανδρον
κέλευε. τί γὰρ οὐχὶ κοινῇ τῶν ἀνδρῶν ἀποπειρώμενοι
τῷ βελτίονι τιθέμεθα; δίκαια λέγειν ὁ τῆς
Ἀλκμήνης ἐδόκει τῷ Διί. [C] καὶ ἐπεισελθόντος
αὐτοῦ τοῖς ἥρωσιν οὔτε ὁ Καῖσαρ οὔτε ἄλλος τις
ὑπανίστατο· καταλαβὼν δὲ σχολάζουσαν καθέδραν,
ἣν ὁ τοῦ Σεβήρου παῖς ἐπεποίητο ἑαυτῷ,
ἐκεῖνος γὰρ ἀπελήλατο διὰ τὴν ἀδελφοκτονίαν,
<pb n='368'/><anchor id='Pg368'/><anchor id='Pg369'/>
ἐνεκάθισε, καὶ ὁ Σειληνὸς ἐπισκώπτων τὸν Κυρῖνον,
Ὅρα, εἶπε, μή ποτε οὗτοι ἑνὸς εἰσιν<note place='foot'>ἑνός εἰσιν ἀντάξιοι Naber, ἑνὸς ὦσιν οὐκ ἀντάξιοι Hertlein,
MSS.; V omits οὐκ.</note> ἀντάξιοι
τουτουὶ τοῦ Γραικοῦ. Μὰ Δία, εἶπεν ὁ Κυρῖνος,
οἶμαι πολλοὺς εἶναι μὴ χείρονας. οὕτω δὲ αὐτὸν
οἱ ἐμοὶ τεθαυμάκασιν ἔγγονοι, [D] ὥστε μόνον αὐτὸν
ἐκ πάντων, ὅσοι γεγόνασιν ἡγεμόνες ξένοι, ὀνομάζουσι
καὶ νομίζουσι μέγαν. οὐ μὴν ἔτι καὶ
τῶν παρ᾽ ἑαυτοῖς γεγονότων οἴονται μείζονα τοῦτον,
ἴσως μὲν ὑπὸ φιλαυτίας τι παθόντες, ἴσως δὲ
καὶ οὕτως ἔχον· εἰσόμεθα δὲ αὐτίκα μάλα τῶν
ἀνδρῶν ἀποπειρώμενοι. ταῦτα μάλιστα λέγων ὁ
Κυρῖνος ἠρυθρία, καὶ δῆλος ἦν ἀγωνιῶν ὑπὲρ τῶν
ἀπογόνων τῶν ἑαυτοῦ, μή του τὰ δευτερεῖα
λαβόντες οἴχωνται.
</p>

<p>
(When the feast had been prepared as I have
described, the gods lacked nothing, since all things
are theirs. Then Hermes proposed to examine the
heroes personally and Zeus was of the same mind.
Quirinus thereupon begged that he might summon
one of their number to his side. <q>Quirinus,</q> said
Heracles, <q>I will not have it. For why did you not
invite to the feast my beloved Alexander also? Zeus,
if you are minded to introduce into our presence any
of these Emperors, send, I beg of you, for Alexander.
For if we are to examine into the merits of men
generally, why do we not throw open the competition
to the better man?</q> Zeus considered that
what the son of Alcmena said was only just. So
Alexander joined the company of heroes, but neither
Caesar nor anyone else yielded his place to him.
However he found and took a vacant seat which the
son<note place='foot'>Caracalla.</note> of Severus had taken for himself&mdash;he had been
expelled for fratricide. Then Silenus began to rally
Quirinus and said, <q>See now whether all these
Romans can match this one Greek.</q><note place='foot'>Cf. Plato, <hi rend='italic'>Laws</hi> 730 <hi rend='smallcaps'>d</hi>; Julian, <hi rend='italic'>Misopogon</hi> 353 <hi rend='smallcaps'>d</hi>.</note> <q>By Zeus,</q>
retorted Quirinus, <q>I consider that many of them
are as good as he! It is true that my descendants
have admired him so much that they hold that he
alone of all foreign generals is worthy to be styled
<q>the Great.</q> But it does not follow that they think
him greater than their own heroes; which may be
due to national prejudice, but again they may be
right. However, that we shall very soon find out by
examining these men.</q> Even as he spoke Quirinus
was blushing, and was evidently extremely anxious
on behalf of his descendants and feared that they
might come off with the second prize.)
</p>

<p>
[317] Μετὰ τοῦτο ὁ Ζεὺς ἤρετο τοὺς θεούς, πότερον
χρὴ πάντας ἐπὶ τὸν ἀγῶνα καλεῖν ἤ, καθάπερ ἐν
τοῖς γυμνικοῖς ἀγῶσι γίνεται, ὁ τοῦ πολλὰς ἀνελομένου
νίκας κρατήσας, ἑνὸς περιγενόμενος, οὐδὲν
ἔλαττον δοκεῖ κἀκείνων γεγονέναι κρείσσων, οἳ
προσεπάλαισαν μὲν οὐδαμῶς αὐτῷ, τοῦ κρατηθέντος
δὲ ἥττους ἐγένοντο. καὶ ἐδόκει πᾶσιν ἡ
τοιαύτη σφόδρα ἐμμελῶς ἔχειν ἐξέτασις. [B] ἐκήρυττεν
οὖν ὁ Ἑρμῆς παριέναι Καίσαρα καὶ τὸν
Ὀκταβιανὸν ἐπὶ τούτῳ, Τραϊανὸν δὲ ἐκ τρίτων,
ὡς πολεμικωτάτους. εἶτα γενομένης σιωπῆς ὁ
βασιλεὺς Κρόνος βλέψας εἰς τὸν Δία θαυμάζειν
ἔφη, πολεμικοὺς μὲν αὐτοκράτορας ὁρῶν ἐπὶ τὸν
ἀγῶνα τουτονὶ καλουμένους, οὐδένα μέντοι πιλόσοφον.
Ἐμοὶ δέ, εἶπεν, οὐχ ἧττόν εἰσιν οἱ
τοιοῦτοι φίλοι. [C] καλεῖτε οὖν εἴσω καὶ τὸν
<pb n='370'/><anchor id='Pg370'/><anchor id='Pg371'/>
Μάρκον. ἐπεὶ δὲ καὶ ὁ Μάρκος κληθεὶς παρῆλθε,
σεμνὸς ἄγαν, ὑπὸ τῶν πόνων ἔχων τά τε ὄμματα
καὶ τὸ πρόσωπον ὑπό τι συνεσταλμένον, κάλλος
δὲ ἀμήχανον ἐν αὐτῷ τούτῳ δεικνύων, ἐν ᾧ παρεῖχεν
ἑαυτὸν ἄκομψον καὶ ἀκαλλώπιστον· ἥ τε
γὰρ ὑπήνη βαθεῖα παντάπασιν ἦν αὐτῷ καὶ τὰ
ἱμάτια λιτὰ καὶ σώφρονα, καὶ ὑπὸ τῆς ἐνδείας
τῶν τροφῶν ἦν αὐτῷ [D] τὸ σῶμα διαυγέστατον καὶ
διαφανέστατον ὥσπερ αὐτὸ οἶμαι τὸ καθαρώτατον
καὶ εἰλικρινέστατον φῶς· ἐπεὶ καὶ οὗτος ἦν εἴσω
τῶν ἱερῶν περιβόλων, ὁ Διόνυσος εἶπεν, Ὦ
βασιλεῦ Κρόνε καὶ Ζεῦ πάτερ, ἆρα ἄξιον ἐν
θεοῖς ἀτελὲς εἶναί τι; τῶν δὲ οὐ φαμένων, Εἰσάγωμεν
οὖν τινα καὶ ἀπολαύσεως ἐραστὴν ἐνθαδί.
καὶ ὁ Ζεύς, Ἀλλ᾽ οὐ θεμιτὸν εἴσω φοιτᾶν, εἶπεν,
ἀνδρὶ μὴ τὰ ἡμέτερα ζηλοῦντι. Γιγνέσθω τοίνυν,
εἶπεν, ἐπὶ τῶν προθύρων, ὁ Διόνυσος, αὐτοῖς ἡ
κρίσις. ἀλλ᾽, [318] εἰ τοῦτο δοκεῖ ταύτῃ, καλῶμεν
ἄνδρα οὐκ ἀπόλεμον μέν, ἡδονῇ δὲ καὶ ἀπολαύσει
χειροηθέστερον. ἡκέτω οὖν ἄχρι τῶν προθύρων
ὁ Κωνσταντίνος. ἐπεὶ δὲ ἐδέδοκτο καὶ τοῦτο,
τίνα χρὴ τρόπον αὐτοὺς ἁμιλλᾶσθαι, γνώμη
προυτέθη. καὶ ὁ μὲν Ἑρμῆς ἠξίου λέγειν ἕκαστον
ἐν μέρει περὶ τῶν ἑαυτοῦ, τίθεσθαι δὲ τοὺς θεοὺς
τὴν ψῆφον. οὐ μὴν ἐδόκει ταῦτα τῷ Ἀπόλλωνι
καλῶς ἔχειν· ἀληθείας γὰρ εἶναι, [B] καὶ οὐ πιθανότητος
οὐδ᾽ αἱμυλίας ἐν θεοῖς ἔλεγχον καὶ ἐξέτασιν.
βουλόμενος δὲ ὁ Ζεὺς ἀμφοτέροις χαρίζεσθαι καὶ
ἅμα προάγειν ἐπὶ πλέον αὐτοῖς τὴν συνουσίαν,
Οὐδέν, εἶπε, κωλύει λέγειν μὲν αὐτοῖς ἐπιτρέψαι,
μικρὰ τοῦ ὕδατος ἐπιμετρήσαντασ, εἶτα ὕστερον
<pb n='372'/><anchor id='Pg372'/><anchor id='Pg373'/>
ἀνερωτᾶν [C] καὶ ἀποπειρᾶσθαι τῆς ἑκάστου διανοίας.
καὶ ὁ Σειληνὸς ἐπισκώπτων, Ἀλλ᾽ ὅπως μή, νομίσαντες
αὐτὸ νέκταρ εἶναι, Τραïανός τε καὶ Ἀλέξανδρος
ἅπαν ἐκροφήσουσι<note place='foot'>ἐκροφήσουσι Hertlein suggests, ἐκροφήσωσι MSS.</note> τὸ ὕδωρ, εἶτα ἀφελοῦνται<note place='foot'>ἀφελοῦνται Hertlein suggests, ἀφέλωνται MSS.</note>
τοὺς ἄλλους. καὶ ὁ Ποσειδῶν, Οὐ τοὐμοῦ ὕδατος,
εἶπεν, ἀλλὰ τοῦ ὑμετέρου πώματος ἐρασταὶ τὼ
ἄνδρε ἐγενέσθην. [D] ὑπὲρ τῶν σεαυτοῦ τοιγαροῦν
ἀμπέλων μᾶλλον ἢ τῶν ἐμῶν πηγῶν ἄξιόν ἐστί
σοι δεδιέναι. καὶ ὁ Σειληνὸς δηχθεὶς ἐσιώπα, καὶ
τοῖς ἀγωνιζομένοις ἐκ τούτου τὸν νοῦν προσεῖχεν.
Ἑρμῆς δὲ ἐκήρυττεν·
</p>

<p>
(Then Zeus asked the gods whether it would be
better to summon all the Emperors to enter the lists,
or whether they should follow the custom of athletic
contests, which is that he who defeats the winner of
many victories, though he overcome only that one
competitor is held thereby to have proved himself
superior to all who have been previously defeated,
and that too though they have not wrestled with the
winner, but only shown themselves inferior to an
antagonist who has been defeated. All the gods
agreed that this was a very suitable sort of test.
Hermes then summoned Caesar to appear before
them, then Octavian, and thirdly Trajan, as being
the greatest warriors. In the silence that followed,
Kronos turned to Zeus and said that he was astonished
to see that only martial Emperors were summoned to
the competition, and not a single philosopher. <q>For
my part,</q> he added, <q>I like philosophers just as well.
So tell Marcus<note place='foot'>Marcus Aurelius.</note> to come in too.</q> Accordingly Marcus
was summoned and came in looking excessively
dignified and showing the effect of his studies in
the expression of his eyes and his lined brows. His
aspect was unutterably beautiful from the very fact
that he was careless of his appearance and unadorned
by art; for he wore a very long beard, his dress was
plain and sober, and from lack of nourishment his
body was very shining and transparent, like light
most pure and stainless. When he too had entered
the sacred enclosure, Dionysus said, <q>King Kronos
and Father Zeus, can any incompleteness exist among
the gods?</q> And when they replied that it could
not, <q>Then,</q> said he, <q>let us bring in here some
votary of pleasure as well.</q> <q>Nay,</q> answered Zeus,
<q>it is not permitted that any man should enter here
who does not model himself on us.</q> <q>In that case,</q>
said Dionysus, <q>let them be tried at the entrance.
Let us summon by your leave a man not unwarlike
but a slave to pleasure and enjoyment. Let
Constantine come as far as the door.</q> When this
had been agreed upon, opinions were offered as to
the manner in which they were to compete. Hermes
thought that everyone ought to speak for himself in
turn, and then the gods should vote. But Apollo
did not approve of this plan, because he said the
gods ought to test and examine the truth and not
plausible rhetoric and the devices of the orator.
Zeus wished to please them both and at the same
time to prolong the assembly, so he said, <q>There is
no harm in letting them speak if we measure them a
small allowance of water,<note place='foot'>A reference to the water-clock, <foreign rend='italic'>clepsydra</foreign>.</note> and then later on we can
cross-examine them and test the disposition of each
one.</q> Whereupon Silenus said sardonically, <q>Take
care, or Trajan and Alexander will think it is nectar
and drink up all the water and leave none for the
others.</q> <q>It was not my water,</q> retorted Poseidon,
<q>but your vines that these two were fond of. So
you had better tremble for your vines rather than
for my springs.</q> Silenus was greatly piqued and
had no answer ready, but thereafter turned his
attention to the disputants.
Then Hermes made this proclamation:)
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<lg>
<l>Ἄρχει μὲν ἀγὼν</l>
<l>τῶν καλλίστων</l>
<l>ἄθλων ταμίας,</l>
<l>καιρὸς δὲ καλεῖ</l>
<l>μηκέτι μέλλειν.</l>
<l>ἀλλὰ κλύοντες</l>
<l>τὰν ἁμετέραν</l>
<l>[319] κήρυκα βοὰν</l>
<l>οἱ πρὶν βασιλῆς,</l>
<l>ἔθνεα πολλὰ</l>
<l>δουλωσάμενοι</l>
<l>καὶ πολέμοισι</l>
<l>δάιον ἔγχος</l>
<l>θήξαντες, ὁμοῦ</l>
<l>γνώμης τε μέγαν</l>
<l>πινυτόφρονα νοῦν,</l>
<l>ἴτ᾽, ἐς ἀντίπαλον</l>
<l>[B] ἵστασθε κρίσιν,</l>
<l>οἷς τε φρόνησιν</l>
<l>τέλος ὀλβίστης</l>
<l>θέσθαι βιοτῆς,</l>
<l>οἷς τ᾽ ἀντιβίους</l>
<l>κακὰ πόλλ᾽ ἔρχαι</l>
<l>καὶ χρηστὰ φίλους</l>
<l>τέκμαρ βιότου</l>
<l>νενόμιστο καλοῦ,</l>
<l>οἷς θ᾽ ἡδίστην</l>
<l>ἀπόλαυσιν ἔχειν</l>
<l>[C] τέρματα μόχθων</l>
<l>δαῖτας τε γάμους τ᾽,</l>
<l>ὄμμασι τερπνά,</l>
<l>μαλακάς τε φέρειν</l>
<l>ἐσθῆτας ὁμοῦ</l>
<l>λιθοκολλήτοις</l>
<l>περὶ χεῖρας ἄκρας</l>
<l>ψελίοισι φάνη</l>
<l>μακαριστότατον.</l>
<l>νίκης δὲ τέλος</l>
<l>Ζηνὶ μελήσει.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>(<q rend='pre'>The trial that begins</q></l>
<l>Awards to him who wins</l>
<l>The fairest prize to-day.</l>
<l>And lo, the hour is here</l>
<l>And summons you. Appear!</l>
<l>Ye may no more delay.</l>
<l>Come hear the herald's call</l>
<l>Ye princes one and all.</l>
<l>Many the tribes of men</l>
<l>Submissive to you then!</l>
<l>How keen in war your swords!</l>
<l>But now 'tis wisdom's turn;</l>
<l>Now let your rivals learn</l>
<l>How keen can be your words.</l>
<l>Wisdom, thought some, is bliss</l>
<l>Most sure in life's short span;</l>
<l>Others did hold no less</l>
<l>That power to ban or bless</l>
<l>Is happiness for man.</l>
<l>But some set Pleasure high,</l>
<l>Idleness, feasting, love,</l>
<l>All that delights the eye;</l>
<l>Their raiment soft and fine,</l>
<l>Their hands with jewels shine,</l>
<l>Such bliss did they approve.</l>
<l>But whose the victory won</l>
<l><q rend='post'>Shall Zeus decide alone.</q><note place='foot'>In this doggerel made up of tags of anapaestic verse,
Julian reproduces in the first five and last two verses the
proclamation made at the Olympic games. The first three
verses occur in Lucian, <hi rend='italic'>Demonax</hi> 65.</note>)</l>
</lg>

</quote>

<pb n='374'/><anchor id='Pg374'/><anchor id='Pg375'/>

<p>
[D] Τοιαῦτα τοῦ Ἑρμοῦ κηρύττοντος ἐκληροῦντο·
καί πως συνέδραμε τῇ τοῦ Καίσαρος ὁ κλῆρος
φιλοπρωτίᾳ. τοῦτο ἐκεῖνον μὲν ἐποίησε γαῦρον
καὶ σοβαρώτερον· ἐδέησε δὲ διὰ τοῦτο μικροῦ καὶ
φεύγειν τὴν κρίσιν ὁ Ἀλέξανδρος· ἀλλὰ παραθαρρύνων
αὐτὸν ὁ μέγας Ἡρακλῆς ἐπέσχε. δεύτερος
δὲ ἐπ᾽ ἐκεΊνῳ λέγειν ἔλαχεν Ἀλέξανδρος·
ἐπὶ δὲ τῶν ἑξῆς [320] οἱ κλῆροι τοῖς ἑκάστου χρόνοις
συμπροῆλθον. ἤρξατο οὖν ὁ Καῖσαρ ὡδί· Ἐμοὶ
μέν, ὦ Ζεῦ καὶ θεοί, γενέσθαι ἐν τηλικαύτῃ
<pb n='376'/><anchor id='Pg376'/><anchor id='Pg377'/>
συνέβη πόλει μετὰ τοσούτους ἄνδρας, ὥστε τὴν
μὲν ὅσων οὐ πώποτε ἄλλη πόλις ἐβασίλευσε
βασιλεύειν, ταῖς δὲ ἀγαπητὸν τὸ καὶ τὰ δεύτερα
κομίσασθαι. τίς γὰρ πόλις ἀπὸ τρισχιλίων
ἀνδρῶν ἀρξαμένη [B] ἐν οὐδὲ ὅλοις ἔτεσιν ἑξακοσίοις
ἐπὶ γῆς ἦλθε πέρατα τοῖς ὄπλοις; ποῖα δὲ ἔθνη
τοσούτους ἄνδρας ἀγαθούς τε καὶ πολεμικοὺς
παρέσχετο καὶ νομοθετικούς; θεοὺς δὲ ἐτίμησαν
οὕτω τίνες; ἐν δὴ τοσαύτῃ καὶ τηλικαύτῃ πόλει
γενόμενος οὐ τοὺς κατ᾽ ἐμαυτὸν μόνον, ἀλλὰ καὶ
τοὺς πώποτε παρῆλθον τοῖς ἔργοις. καὶ τῶν
ἐμῶν μὲν πολιτῶν εὖ οἶδα ὡς οὐδεὶς ἀντιποιήσεταί
μοι τῶν πρωτείων· [C] εἰ δὲ Ἀλέξανδρος οὑτοσὶ
τολμᾷ, τίνα τῶν ἔργων τῶν ἑαυτοῦ τοῖς ἐμοῖς
ἀξιοῖ παραβαλεῖν; ἴσως τὰ Περσικά, ὥσπερ οὐχ
ἑορακὼς ἐγηγερμένα μοι τοσαῦτα κατὰ Πομπηίου
τρόπαια; καίτοι τίς δεινότερος στρατηγὸς γέγονε,
Δαρεῖος ἢ Πομπήιος; ποτέρῳ δὲ ἀνδρειότερον
ἠκολούθει στρατόπεδον; τὰ μὲν οὖν μαχιμώτατα
τῶν Δαρείῳ πρότερον [D] ὑπακουόντων ἐθνῶν ἐν τῇ
Καρῶν μοίρᾳ Πομπήιος εἶχεν ἑπόμενα, τοὺς δὲ ἐκ
τῆς Εὐρώπης, οἳ τὴν Ἀσίαν πολλάκις πόλεμον
ἐπάγουσαν ἐτρέψαντο, καὶ τούτων αὐτῶν τοὺς
ἀνδρειοτάτους, Ἰταλούς, Ἰλλυριούς, Κελτούς. ἀλλ᾽
ἐπειδὴ τῶν Κελτῶν ὑπεμνήσθην, ἆρα τοῖς Γετικοῖς
ἔργοις Ἀλεξάνδρου τὴν τῆς Κελτικῆς ἀντιτάττομεν
καθαίρεσιν; οὗτος ἅπαξ ἐπεραιώθη τὸν
Ἴστρον, ἐγὼ δεύτερον τὸν Ῥῆνον· Γερμανικὸν
αὖ τοῦτο τὸ ἐμὸν ἔργον. τούτῳ δὲ ἀντέστη μὲν
<pb n='378'/><anchor id='Pg378'/><anchor id='Pg379'/>
οὐδὲ εἷς, [321] ἐγὼ πρὸς Ἀριόβιστον ἠγωνισάμην
πρῶτος ἐτόλμησα Ῥωμαίων ἐπιβὴναι τῆς ἐκτὸς
θαλάσσης. καὶ τοῦτο ἦν ἴσως τὸ ἔργον οὐ θαυμαστόν.
καίτοι τὴν τόλμαν καὶ ταύτην ἄξιον
θαυμάσαι· ἀλλὰ τὸ μεῖζόν μου, τὸ ἀποβῆναι τῆς
νεὼς πρῶτον· καὶ τοὺς Ἑλβετίους σιωπῶ καὶ τὸ
τῶν Ἰβήρων ἔθνος. οὐδενὸς ἔτι τῶν Γαλατικῶν
ἐπεμνήσθην, πλεῖν<note place='foot'>πλεῖν Cobet, πλέον Hertlein, MSS.</note> ἢ τριακοσίας ὑπαγαγόμενος
πόλεις, ἀνδρῶν δὲ οὐκ ἐλάσσους ἢ διακοσίας
μυριάδας. ὄντων δὲ τούτων μοι τοιούτων ἔργων,
ἐκεῖνο μεῖζον ἦν καὶ τολμηρότερον. [B] ἐχρῆν γάρ
με καὶ πρὸς αὐτοὺς διαγωνίζεσθαι τοὺς πολίτας
καὶ κρατεῖν τῶν ἀμάχων καὶ ἀνικήτων Ῥωμαίων.
εἴτε οὖν πλήθει τις κρίνει παρατάξεων, τρὶς
τοσαυτάκις παρεταξάμην, ὁσάκις ὑπὲρ Ἀλεξάνδρου
κομπάζουσιν οἱ τὰ περὶ αὐτοῦ σεμνοποιοῦντες,
εἴτε πλήθει πόλεων αἰχμαλώτων, οὐ
τῆς Ἀσίας μόνον, [C] ἀλλὰ καὶ τῆς Εὐρώπης τὰ
πλεῖστα κατεστρεψάμην. Ἀλέξανδρος Αἴγυπτον
ἐπῆλθε<note place='foot'>ἐπῆλθε Hertlein suggests, περιῆλθε Cobet, παρῆλθε MSS.</note> θεωρῶν, ἐγὼ δὲ συμπόσια συγκροτῶν
κατεπολέμησα. τὴν δὲ μετὰ τὸ κρατῆσαι πρᾳότητα
βούλεσθε ἐξετάσαι τὴν παρ᾽ ἑκατέρῳ; ἐγὼ
καὶ τοῖς πολεμίοις συνέγνων· ἔπαθον γοῦν ὑπ᾽
αὐτῶν ὅσα ἐμέλησε τῇ Δίκῃ· ὁ δὲ πρὸς τοῖς
πολεμίοις οὐδὲ τῶν φίλων ἀπέσχετο. [D] ἔτι οὖν
μοι περὶ τῶν πρωτείων ἀμφισβητεῖν οἷός τε ἔσῃ;
καὶ οὐκ αὐτόθεν καὶ σὺ παραχωρήσεις μετὰ τῶν
ἄλλων, ἀλλὰ ἀναγκάσεις με λέγειν, ὅπως σὺ μὲν
ἐχρήσω πικρῶς Θηβαίοις, ἐγὼ δὲ τοῖς Ἑλβετίοις
<pb n='380'/><anchor id='Pg380'/><anchor id='Pg381'/>
φιλανθρώπως; σὺ μὲν γὰρ ἐκείνων κατέκαυσας τὰς
πόλεις, ἐγὼ δὲ τὰς ὑπὸ τῶν οἰκείων πολιτῶν κεκαυμένας
πόλεις ἀνέστησα. καίτοι οὔτι ταὐτὸν<note place='foot'>οὔτι ταὐτὸν Hertlein suggests, τί τοσοῦτον MSS.</note> ἦν
μυρίων Γραικῶν κρατῆσαι καὶ πεντεκαίδεκα μυριάδας
ἐπιφερομένας ὑποστῆναι. [322] πολλὰ εἰπεῖν ἔχων
ἔτι περὶ ἐμαυτοῦ καὶ τοῦδε, τῷ μὴ σχολὴν ἄγειν
ἥκιστα τὸ λέγειν ἐξεμελέτησα. διόπερ χρὴ συγγνώμην
ὑμᾶς ἔχειν, ἐκ δὲ τῶν εἰρημένων καὶ περὶ
τῶν μὴ ῥηθέντων τὴν ἴσην καὶ δικαίαν ἐξέτασιν
ποιουμένους ἀποδιδόναι μοι τὸ πρωτεῖον.
</p>

<p>
(While Hermes had been making this proclamation
the lots were being drawn, and it happened that the
first lot favoured Caesar's passion for being first. This
made him triumphant and prouder than before. But
the effect on Alexander was that he almost withdrew
from the competition, had not mighty Heracles
encouraged him and prevented him from leaving.
Alexander drew the lot to speak second, but the
lots of those who came next coincided with the
order in which they had lived. Caesar then began
as follows: <q>It was my fortune, O Zeus and ye
other gods, to be born, following a number of great
men, in a city so illustrious that she rules more
subjects than any other city has ever ruled; and
indeed other cities are well pleased to rank as
second to her.<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Oration</hi> 1. 8 <hi rend='smallcaps'>c</hi>.</note> What other city, I ask, began with
three thousand citizens and in less than six centuries
carried her victorious arms to the ends of the earth?
What other nations ever produced so many brave
and warlike men or such lawgivers? What nation
ever honoured the gods as they did? Observe then
that, though I was born in a city so powerful and so
illustrious, my achievements not only surpassed the
men of my own day, but all the heroes who ever
lived. As for my fellow-citizens I am confident that
there is none who will challenge my superiority.
But if Alexander here is so presumptuous, which of
his deeds does he pretend to compare with mine?
His Persian conquests, perhaps, as though he had
never seen all those trophies that I gathered when I
defeated Pompey! And pray, who was the more
skilful general, Darius or Pompey? Which of them
led the bravest troops? Pompey had in his army the
most martial of the nations formerly subject to
Darius,<note place='foot'>Darius III.</note> but he reckoned them no better than
Carians,<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Oration</hi> 2. 56 <hi rend='smallcaps'>c</hi>.</note> for he led also those European forces which
had often repulsed all Asia when she invaded
Europe, aye and he had the bravest of them all,
Italians, Illyrians, and Celts. And since I have
mentioned the Celts, shall we compare the exploits
of Alexander against the Getae with my conquest of
Gaul? He crossed the Danube once, I crossed the
Rhine twice. The German conquest again is all my
doing. No one opposed Alexander, but I had to
contend against Ariovistus. I was the first Roman
who ventured to sail the outer sea.<note place='foot'>The <q>inner</q> sea was the Mediterranean.</note> Perhaps this
achievement was not so wonderful, though it was a
daring deed that may well command your admiration;
but a more glorious action of mine was when I
leapt ashore from my ship before all the others.<note place='foot'>Caesar, <hi rend='italic'>De Bello Gallico</hi> 4. 25, ascribes this to the standard-bearer
of the tenth legion.</note> Of
the Helvetians and Iberians I say nothing. And
still I have said not a word about my campaigns in
Gaul, when I conquered more than three hundred
cities and no less than two million men! But great
as were these achievements of mine, that which
followed was still greater and more daring. For I
had to contend against my fellow citizens themselves,
and to subdue the invincible, the unconquerable
Romans. Again, if we are judged by the
number of our battles, I fought three times as
many as Alexander, even reckoning by the boasts
of those who embellish his exploits. If one counts
the cities captured, I reduced the greatest number,
not only in Asia but in Europe as well. Alexander only
visited Egypt as a sight-seer, but I conquered her while
I was arranging drinking-parties. Are you pleased to
inquire which of us showed more clemency after victory?
I forgave even my enemies, and for what I
suffered in consequence at their hands Justice has
taken vengeance. But Alexander did not even spare
his friends, much less his enemies. And are you still
capable of disputing the first prize with me? Then
since you will not, like the others, yield place to me,
you compel me to say that whereas I was humane
towards the Helvetians you treated the Thebans
cruelly. You burned their cities to the ground, but
I restored the cities that had been burned by their
own inhabitants. And indeed it was not at all the
same thing to subdue ten thousand Greeks, and to
withstand the onset of a hundred and fifty thousand
men. Much more could I add both about myself
and Alexander, but I have not had leisure to practise
public speaking. Wherefore you ought to pardon
me, but from what I have said and with regard to
what I have not said, you ought, forming that decision
which equity and justice require, to award me
the first prize.</q>)
</p>

<p>
Τοιαῦτα εἰπόντος τοῦ Καίσαρος καὶ λέγειν ἔτι
βουλομένου, μόγις καὶ πρότερον ὁ Ἀλέξανδρος
καρτερῶν οὐκέτι κατέσχεν, ἀλλὰ μετά τινος
ταραχῆς καὶ ἀγωνίας, [B] Ἐγὼ δέ, εἶπεν, ὦ Ζεῦ καὶ
θεοί, μέχρι τίνος ἀνέξομαι σιωπῇ τῆς θρασύτητος
τῆς τούτου; πέρας γὰρ οὐδέν ἐστιν, ὡς ὁρᾶτε,
οὔτε τῶν εἰς αὑτὸν ἐπαίνων οὔτε τῶν εἰς ἐμὲ
βλασφημιῶν. ἐχρῆν δὲ ἴσως μάλιστα μὲν ἀμφοῖν
φείδεσθαι· καί γὰρ εἶναί πως ἀμφότερα δοκεῖ
παραπλησίως ἐπαχθῆ· πλέον δὲ τοῦ τἀμὰ διασύρειν
ἄλλως τε καὶ μιμητὴν αὐτῶν γενόμενον.
ὁ δὲ εἰς τοῦτο ἦλθεν ἀναισχυντίας, [C] ὥστε τολμῆσαι
τὰ ἀρχέτυπα κωμῳδεῖν τῶν ἑαυτοῦ ἔργων. ἐχρῆν
δέ, ὦ Καῖσαρ, ὑπομνησθῆναί σε τῶν δακρύων
ἐκείνων, ἃ τότε ἀφῆκας, ἀκροώμενος τῶν ὑπομνημάτων,
ὅσα πεποίηται περὶ τῶν ἐμῶν πράξεων.
ἀλλ᾽ ὁ Πομπήιος ἐπῆρέ σε μετὰ τοῦτο, κολακευθεὶς
μὲν παρὰ τῶν πολιτῶν τῶν ἑαυτοῦ,
γενόμενος δὲ οὐδεὶς οὐδαμοῦ. [D] τὸ μὲν γὰρ
ἀπὸ Λιβύης θριαμβεῦσαι, οὐ μέγα ἔργον,
<pb n='382'/><anchor id='Pg382'/><anchor id='Pg383'/>
ὀνομαστότατον ἐποίησεν ἡ τῶν τότε ὑπάτων
μαλακία. τὸν δουλικὸν δὲ ἐκεῖνον πόλεμον,
οὐδὲ πρὸς ἄνδρας γενόμενον, ἀλλὰ πρὸς τοὺς
χειρίστους τῶν οἰκετῶν, ἄλλοι μὲν κατειργάσαντο,
Κράσσοι καὶ Λούκιοι, τοὔνομα δὲ καὶ τὴν ἐπιγραφὴν
ἔσχε Πομπήιος. Ἀρμενίαν δὲ καὶ τὰ πρόσοικα
ταύτης κατεπολέμησε Λούκουλλος, ἐθριάμβευσε
δὲ ἀπὸ τούτων Πομπήιος. [323] εἶτ᾽ ἐκολάκευσαν
αὐτὸν οἱ πολῖται καὶ Μέγαν ὠνόμασαν, ὄντα
τίνος τῶν πρὸ ἑαυτοῦ μείζονα; τί γὰρ ἐκείνῳ
τοσοῦτον ἐπράχθη, ἡλίκον Μαρίῳ ἢ Σκηπίωσι
τοῖς δύο ἢ τῷ παρὰ τὸν Κυρῖνον τουτονὶ Φουρίῳ,
ὃς μικροῦ συμπεσοῦσαν τὴν τούτου πόλιν ἀνέστησεν;
οὗτοι γὰρ οὐκ ἀλλοτρίοις ἔργοις, ὥσπερ
ἐν πολιτικαῖς οἰκοδομίαις καὶ δαπανήμασιν ὑπ᾽
ἄλλων καταβληθείσαις [B] καὶ ἐπιτελεσθείσαις ἕτερος
ἄρχων ἐπεγράφη μικρὰ κονιάσας τὸν τοῖχον,
οὕτω ταῖς ἀλλοτρίαις ἐπεγράφησαν πράξεσιν·
ἀρχιτέκτονες δὲ αὐτοὶ καὶ δημιουργοὶ γενόμενοι
τῶν καλλίστων ἠξιώθησαν ὀνομάτων. οὐδὲν οὖν
θαυμαστόν, εἰ κεκράτηκας Πομπηίου δακτύλῳ
κνωμένου καὶ τἆλλα ἀλώπεκος μᾶλλον ἢ λέοντος.
<pb n='384'/><anchor id='Pg384'/><anchor id='Pg385'/>
ἐπειδὴ γὰρ αὐτὸν ἡ τύχη προύδωκεν, ἣ τὸν ἔμπροσθεν
χρόνον αὐτῷ παρειστήκει, ταχέως ἐκράτησας
μόνου. καὶ ὅτι δεινότητι μὲν οὐδεμιᾷ
κρείττων ἐγένου, [C] φανερόν· καὶ γὰρ ἐν ἐνδείᾳ
γεγονὼς<note place='foot'>γεγονὼς Petavius, Naber, γέγονας Hertlein, MSS.</note> τῶν ἐπιτηδείων· ἔστι δὲ οὐ μικρόν,
ὡς οἶσθα, τοῦτο ἁμάρτημα στρατηγοῦ· καὶ μάχῃ
συμβαλὼν ἡττήθης. εἰ δὲ Πομπήιος ὑπ᾽ ἀφροσύνης
τε καὶ ἀνοίας ἢ τοῦ μὴ δύνασθαι τῶν
πολιτῶν ἄρχειν οὔτε, ἡνίκα ἔδει τρίβειν τὸν
πόλεμον, ὑπερετίθετο τὴν μάχην οὔτε τῇ νίκῃ<note place='foot'>τῇ νίκῃ before νικῶν Hertlein suggests; cf. <hi rend='italic'>Oration</hi> 1.
59 <hi rend='smallcaps'>d</hi>.</note>
νικῶν ἐπεξῄει, ὑπὸ τοῖς οἰκείοις ἁμαρτήμασι
[D] καὶ οὐχ ὑπὸ τοῖς σοῖς ἐσφάλη στρατηγήμασι.
</p>

<p>
(When Caesar had spoken to this effect he still
wished to go on talking, but Alexander, who had with
difficulty restrained himself hitherto, now lost patience,
and with some agitation and combativeness:
<q>But <emph>I</emph>,</q> said he, <q rend='pre'>O Jupiter and ye other gods, how
long must I endure in silence the insolence of this
man? There is, as you see, no limit to his praise of
himself or his abuse of me. It would have better become
him perhaps to refrain from both, since both are
alike insupportable, but especially from disparaging
my conduct, the more since he imitated it. But he
has arrived at such a pitch of impudence that he
dares to ridicule the model of his own exploits. Nay,
Caesar, you ought to have remembered those tears
you shed on hearing of the monuments that had
been consecrated to my glorious deeds.<note place='foot'>At Gades, on seeing a statue of Alexander; cf. Suetonius,
<hi rend='italic'>Julius Caesar</hi> 7.</note> But since
then Pompey has inflated you with pride, Pompey
who though he was the idol of his countrymen was
in fact wholly insignificant. Take his African
triumph: that was no great exploit, but the feebleness
of the consuls in office made it seem glorious.
Then the famous Servile War<note place='foot'>Led by Spartacus 73-71 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi>; Appian, <hi rend='italic'>Civil Wars</hi> I.
116-120.</note> was waged not
against men but the vilest of slaves, and its successful
issue was due to others, I mean Crassus and
Lucius,<note place='foot'>Lucius Gellius; Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Crassus</hi>.</note> though Pompey gained the reputation and
the credit for it. Again, Armenia and the neighbouring
provinces were conquered by Lucullus,<note place='foot'>Licinius Lucullus the conqueror of Mithridates.</note> yet
for these also Pompey triumphed. Then he became
the idol of the citizens and they called him <q>the
Great.</q> Greater, I ask, than whom of his predecessors?
What achievement of his can be compared
with those of Marius<note place='foot'>Caius Marius the rival of Sulla.</note> or of the two Scipios or of
Furius,<note place='foot'>Furius Camillus repulsed the Gauls 390 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi>; cf. <hi rend='italic'>Oration</hi>
1. 29 <hi rend='smallcaps'>d</hi>.</note> who sits over there by Quirinus because he
rebuilt his city when it was almost in ruins? Those
men did not make their reputation at the expense of
others, as happens with public buildings built at the
public expense; I mean that one man lays the
foundation, another finishes the work, while the last
man who is in office though he has only whitewashed
the walls has his name inscribed on the building.<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Letter to Themistius</hi>, 267 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b</hi>.</note>
Not thus, I repeat, did those men gain credit for the
deeds of others. They were themselves the creators
and artificers of their schemes and deserved their
illustrious titles. Well then, it is no wonder that you
vanquished Pompey, who used to scratch his head
with his finger-tip<note place='foot'>A proverb for effeminacy; cf. Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Pompeius</hi> 48;
Juvenal 9. 133, <hi rend='italic'>qui digito scalpunt uno caput</hi>; Lucian, <hi rend='italic'>The
Rhetorician's Guide</hi> 11.</note> and in all respects was more of a
fox than a lion. When he was deserted by Fortune
who had so long favoured him, you easily overcame
him, thus unaided. And it is evident that it was not
to any superior ability of yours that you owed your
victory, since after running short of provisions<note place='foot'>At Dyrrhachium; Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Julius Caesar</hi>.</note>&mdash;no
small blunder for a general to make, as I need not
tell you&mdash;you fought a battle and were beaten. And
if from imprudence or lack of judgment or inability
to control his countrymen Pompey neither postponed
a battle when it was his interest to protract the war,
nor followed up a victory when he had won,<note place='foot'>An echo of Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Apophthegmata</hi> 206 <hi rend='smallcaps'>d</hi>.</note> it was
due to his own errors that he failed, and not to your
strategy.</q>)
</p>

<p>
Πέρσαι δὲ πανταχοῦ καλῶς καὶ φρονίμως παρεσκευασμένοι
πρὸς τὴν ἡμετέραν ἀλκὴν ἐνέδοσαν.
ἐπεὶ δὲ οὐ τοὺ πράττειν ἁπλῶς, ἀλλὰ καὶ τοῦ
τὰ δίκαια πράττειν ἄνδρα ἄριστον καὶ βασιλέα
προσήκει μεταποιεῖσθαι, ἐγὼ μὲν ὑπὲρ τῶν
Ἑλλήνων τοὺς Πέρσας ἀπῄτησα δίκην, καὶ τοὺς
Ἑλληνικοὺς πολέμους ἐπανειλόμην, οὐχὶ τὴν
Ἑλλάδα λυπεῖν βουλόμενος, ἀλλὰ τοὺς κωλύοντάς
με διαβαίνειν καὶ δίκας ἀπαιτεῖν τὸν
Πέρσην ἐπικόπτων. [324] σὺ δὲ τοὺς Γερμανοὺς καὶ
Γαλάτας κατεπολέμησας, ἐπὶ τὴν πατρίδα τὴν
σεαυτοῦ παρασκευαζόμενος, οὗ τί γένοιτ᾽ ἂν χεῖρον
ἢ μιαρώτερον; ἐπεὶ δὲ ὥσπερ διασύρων τῶν
μυρίων ἐμνημόνευσας Γραικῶν, ὅτι μὲν καὶ ὑμεῖς
ἐντεῦθεν γεγόνατε καὶ τὰ πλεῖστα τῆς Ἰταλίας
ὤκησαν οἱ Γραικοί, καίπερ εἰδὼς ὅμως οὐ παραδέχομαι.
τούτων δὲ αὐτῶν ὀλίγον ἔθνος, Αἰτωλοὺς
<pb n='386'/><anchor id='Pg386'/><anchor id='Pg387'/>
λέγω τοὺς παροικοῦντας ἡμῖν, [B] οὐ φίλους μὲν
ἔχειν καὶ συμμάχους ἐποιήσασθε περὶ πολλοῦ,
πολεμωθέντας δὲ ὑμῖν ὕστερον δι᾽ ἁσδήποτε
αἰτίας οὐκ ἀκινδύνως ὑπακούειν ὑμῖν ἠναγκάσατε;
οἱ δὲ πρὸς τὸ γῆρας, ὡς ἂν εἴποι τισ, τῆς
Ἑλλάδος, καὶ οὐδὲ πάσης, ἀλλ᾽ ἔθνους μικροῦ,
ἡνίκα ἤκμαζε τὸ Ἑλληνικόν, οὐδ᾽ ὅτι ἔστι
γιγνωσκομένου, μικροῦ δέω φάναι, μόγις ἀρκέσαντες,
τίνες ἂν ἐγένεσθε, [C] εἰ πρὸς ἀκμάζοντας
καὶ ὁμονοοῦντας τοὺς Ἕλληνας πολεμεῖν ὑμᾶς
ἐδέησεν; ἐπεὶ καὶ Πύρρου διαβάντος ἐφ᾽ ὑμᾶς
ἴστε ὅπως ἐπτήξατε. εἰ δὲ τὸ Περσῶν κρατῆσαι
μικρὸν νομίζεις καὶ τὸ τηλικοῦτον ἔργον διασύρεις,
ὀλίγης πάνυ τῆς ὑπὲρ τὸν Τίγρητα ποταμὸν
ὑπὸ Παρθυαίων βασιλευομένης χώρας, ἔτη πλέον
ἢ τριακόσια πολεμοῦντες, λέγε μοι, δι᾽ ἣν αἰτίαν
οὐκ ἐκρατήσατε; [D] βούλει σοι φράσω; τὰ Περσῶν
ὑμᾶς εἶρξε βέλη. φρασάτω δέ σοι περὶ αὐτῶν
Ἀντώνιος<note place='foot'>Ἀντώνιος Cobet rejects, since Julian prefers to substitute
descriptive phrases for names.</note> ὁ παιδοτριβηθεὶς ἐπὶ στρατηγίᾳ παρὰ
σοῦ. ἐγὼ δὲ ἐν οὐδὲ ὅλοις ἐνιαυτοῖς δέκα πρὸς
τούτοις καὶ Ἰνδῶν γέγονα κύριος. εἶτ᾽ ἐμοὶ
τολμᾷς ἀμφισβητεῖν, ὃς ἐκ παιδαρίου στρατηγῶν
ἔργα ἔπραξα τηλικαῦτα, ὥστε τὴν μνήμην, καίπερ
οὐκ ἀξίως ὑπὸ τῶν συγγραφέων ὑμνηθέντων,
ὅμως<note place='foot'>ὅμως Cobet, ὅμως δὲ Hertlein, MSS.</note> συμπαραμένειν τῷ βίῳ. [325] καθάπερ τῶν
τοῦ Καλλινίκου, τοὐμοῦ βασιλέως, οὗ θεράπων
ἐγὼ καὶ ζηλωτὴς ἐγενόμην, Ἀχιλλεῖ μὲν ἁμιλλώμενος
τῷ προγόνῳ, Ἡρακλέα δὲ θαυμάζων
καὶ ἑπόμενος, ἅτε δὴ κατ᾽ ἴχνος θεοῦ ἄνθρωπος.
</p>

<p>
(<q rend='pre'>The Persians, on the contrary, though on all occasions
they were well and wisely equipped, had to
submit to my valour. And since it becomes a virtuous
man and a king to pride himself not merely on
his exploits but also on the justice of those exploits,
it was on behalf of the Greeks that I took vengeance
on the Persians, and when I made war on the Greeks
it was not because I wished to injure Greece, but
only to chastise those who tried to prevent me from
marching through and from calling the Persians to
account. You, however, while you subdued the Germans
and Gauls were preparing to fight against your
fatherland. What could be worse or more infamous?
And since you have alluded as though insultingly to
<q>ten thousand Greeks,</q> I am aware that you Romans
are yourselves descended from the Greeks, and that
the greater part of Italy was colonised by Greeks;
however on that fact I do not insist. But at any rate
did not you Romans think it very important to have
as friends and allies one insignificant tribe of those
very Greeks, I mean the Aetolians, my neighbours?
And later, when you had gone to war with them for
whatever reason, did you not have great trouble in
making them obey you? Well then, if in the old
age, as one may say, of Greece, you were barely able
to reduce not the whole nation but an insignificant
state which was hardly heard of when Greece was in
her prime, what would have happened to you if you
had had to contend against the Greeks when they were
in full vigour and united? You know how cowed you
were when Pyrrhus crossed to invade you. And if
you think the conquest of Persia such a trifle and
disparage an achievement so glorious, tell me why,
after a war of more than three hundred years, you
Romans have never conquered a small province
beyond the Tigris which is still governed by the
Parthians? Shall I tell you why? It was the arrows
of the Persians that checked you. Ask Antony to
give you an account of them, since he was trained
for war by you. I, on the other hand, in less
than ten years conquered not only Persia but India
too. After that do you dare to dispute the prize
with me, who from childhood have commanded
armies, whose exploits have been so glorious that
the memory of them&mdash;though they have not been
worthily recounted by historians&mdash;will nevertheless
live for ever, like those of the Invincible Hero,<note place='foot'>Heracles.</note> my
king, whose follower I was, on whom I modelled
myself? Achilles my ancestor I strove to rival, but
Heracles I ever admired and followed, so far as a
mere man may follow in the footsteps of a god.</q>)
</p>

<pb n='388'/><anchor id='Pg388'/><anchor id='Pg389'/>

<p>
Ὅσα μὲν οὖν ἐχρῆν, ὦ θεοί, πρὸς τοῦτον
ἀπολογήσασθαι· καίτοι κρεῖττον ἦν ὑπεριδεῖν
αὐτοῦ· εἴρηται. [B] εἰ δέ τι πικρὸν ὑφ᾽ ἡμῶν
ἐπράχθη, οὔτι παντάπασιν εἰς ἀναιτίους ἀνθρώπους,
ἀλλὰ ἢ πολλάκις καὶ ἐπὶ πολλοῖς προσκρούσαντας
ἢ τῷ καιρῷ μὴ καλῶς μηδὲ πρεπόντως
χρησαμένους, ἠκολούθησε γοῦν ἐπὶ μὲν
τοῖς διὰ τὸν καιρὸν ἐξαμαρτηθεῖσιν ἡ μεταμέλεια,
σώφρων πάνυ καὶ τῶν ἐξημαρτηκότων σώτειρα
δαίμων, [C] τοὺς δὲ ὥσπερ φιλοτιμουμένους ἐπὶ
τῷ πολλάκις ἀπεχθάνεσθαι καὶ προσκρούειν
οὐδὲν ᾤμην ἄδικον ποιεῖν κολάζων.
</p>

<p>
(<q>Thus much, ye gods, I was bound to say in my
own defence against this man; though indeed it
would have been better to ignore him. And if some
things I did seemed cruel, I never was so to the
innocent, but only to those who had often and in
many ways thwarted me and had made no proper or
fitting use of their opportunities. And even my
offences against these, which were due to the emergency
of the time, were followed by Remorse, that
very wise and divine preserver of men who have
erred. As for those whose ambition it was to show
their enmity continually and to thwart me, I considered
that I was justified in chastising them.</q>)
</p>

<p>
Ἐπεὶ δὲ εἴρητο καὶ τούτῳ στρατιωτικώτερον
ὁ λόγος, ἐπὶ τὸν Ὀκταβιανὸν τὴν ὑδρίαν ἔφερεν
ὁ τοῦ Ποσειδῶνος θεράπων, ἐπιμετρῶν αὐτῷ
τοῦ ὕδατος ἔλασσον διὰ τὸν καιρόν, ἄλλως τε
καὶ μνησικακῶν αὐτῷ τῆς εἰς τὸν θεὸν ὑπερηφανίας.
[D] καὶ ὃς ἐπειδὴ συνῆκεν ὑπὸ ἀγχινοίας,
ἀφεὶς τὸ λέγειν τι περὶ τῶν ἀλλοτρίων, Ἐγὼ
δέ, εἶπεν. ὦ Ζεῦ καὶ θεοί, τοῦ διασύρειν μὲν τὰ
τῶν ἄλλων ἔργα καὶ μικρὰ ποιεῖν ἀφέξομαι, περὶ
δὲ τῶν ἐμαυτοῦ τὸν πάντα ποιήσομαι λόγον. νέος
προύστην τῆς ἐμαυτοῦ πόλεως ὥσπερ οὗτος ὁ
γενναῖος Ἀλέξανδρος, κατώρθωσα δὲ Γερμανικοὺς
πολέμους ὥσπερ [326] ὁ ἐμὸς πατὴρ οὑτοσὶ Καῖσαρ.
συμπλακεὶς δὲ τοῖς ἐμφυλίοις ἀγῶσιν Αἴγυπτον
μὲν περὶ τὸ Ἄκτιον κατεναυμάχησα, Βροῦτον
δὲ καὶ Κάσσιον περὶ τοὺς Φιλίππους κατεπολέμησα,
καὶ τὸν Πομπηίου παῖδα Σέξτον πάρεργον
<pb n='390'/><anchor id='Pg390'/><anchor id='Pg391'/>
ἐθέμην τῆς ἐμαυτοῦ στρατηγίας. οὕτω δὲ παρέσχον
ἐμαυτὸν τῇ φιλοσοφίᾳ χειροήθη, ὥστε καὶ τῆς
Ἀθηνοδώρου παρρησίας ἠνεσχόμην, οὐκ ἀγανακτῶν,
ἀλλ᾽ εὐφραινόμενος ἐπ᾽ αὐτῇ, [B] καὶ τὸν ἄνδρα
καθάπερ παιδαγωγὸν ἢ πατέρα μᾶλλον αἰδούμενος.
Ἄρειον δὲ καὶ φίλον καὶ συμβιωτὴν
ἐπιγράφομαι, καὶ ὅλως οὐδέν ἐστιν ὑφ᾽ ἡμῶν εἰς
τὴν φιλοσοφίαν ἁμαρτηθέν. ὑπὸ δὲ τῶν ἐμφυλίων
στάσεων τὴν Ῥώμην ὁρῶν εἰς τὸν<note place='foot'>τὸν Hertlein would add.</note>
ἔσχατον ἐλαύνουσαν πολλάκις κίνδυνον οὕτω
διεθέμην τὰ περὶ αὐτήν, ὥστε εἶναι, εἰ μὴ δι᾽
ὑμᾶς, [C] ὦ θεοί, τὸ λοιπὸν ἀδαμαντίνην. οὐ γὰρ
ταῖς ἀμέτροις ἐπιθυμίαις εἴκων ἐπικτᾶσθαι πάντως
αὐτῇ διενοήθην, ὅρια δὲ διττά, ὥσπερ ὑπὸ
τῆς φύσεως ἀποδεδειγμένα,<note place='foot'>ἀποδεδειγμένα Cobet, ἀποδεδομένα Hertlein, MSS.</note> Ἴστρον καὶ Εὐφράτην
ποταμοὺς ἐθέμην. εἶτα ὑποτάξας τὸ
Σκυθῶν καὶ Θρᾳκῶν ἔθνος, ἐπιμετρούντων ὑμῶν
τῆς βασιλείας μοι τὸν χρόνον, οὐ πόλεμον ἄλλον
ἐξ ἄλλου περιεσκόπουν, ἀλλὰ εἰς νομοθεσίαν καὶ
τῶν ἐκ τοῦ πολέμου [D] συμφορῶν ἐπανόρθωσιν τὴν
σχολὴν διετιθέμην, οὐδενὸς νομίζων τῶν πρὸ ἐμαυτοῦ
χεῖρον βεβουλεῦσθαι, μᾶλλον δέ, εἰ χρὴ θαρρήσαντα
φάναι, κρεῖσσον τῶν πώποτε τηλικαύτας
ἡγεμονίας ἐπιτροπευσάντων. οἱ μὲν γὰρ ταῖς
στρατηγίαις ἐναπέθανον, ἐξὸν λοιπὸν ἡσυχάζειν<note place='foot'>ἡσυχάζειν Reiske adds.</note>
καὶ μὴ στρατεύεσθαι, πολέμους ἐκ πολέμων
ἑαυτοῖς, ὥσπερ οἱ φιλοπράγμονες δίκας κατασκευάζοντες·
[327] οἱ δὲ καὶ πολεμούμενοι τῇ τρυφῇ
προσεῖχον, οὐ μόνον τῆς μετὰ ταῦτα εὐκλείας τὴν
<pb n='392'/><anchor id='Pg392'/><anchor id='Pg393'/>
αἰσχρὰν τρυφὴν προτιμῶντες, ἀλλὰ καὶ τῆς
σωτηρίας αὐτῆς. ἐγὼ μὲν οὖν ταῦτα διανοούμενος
οὐκ ἀξιῶ τῆς χείρονος ἐμαυτὸν μερίδος· ὅ, τι δ᾽
ἂν ὑμῖν, ὦ θεοί, φαίνηται, τοῦτο εἰκός ἐστιν ἐμὲ
δήπουθεν στέργειν.
</p>

<p>
(When Alexander in his turn had made his speech in
martial fashion, Poseidon's attendant carried the
water-clock to Octavian, but gave him a smaller allowance
of water, partly because time was precious, but
still more because he bore him a grudge for the disrespect
he had shown to the god.<note place='foot'>Suetonius, <hi rend='italic'>Augustus</hi> 16; during the campaign against
Pompey when the fleet of Augustus was lost in a storm, he
swore that he would win in spite of Neptune.</note> Octavian with his
usual sagacity understood this, so without stopping to
say anything that did not concern himself, he began:
<q>For my part, Zeus and ye other gods, I shall not
stay to disparage and belittle the actions of others,
but shall speak only of what concerns myself. Like
the noble Alexander here I was but a youth when I
was called to govern my country. Like Caesar
yonder, my father,<note place='foot'>Augustus was Julius Caesar's nephew, and his son only
by adoption.</note> I conducted successful campaigns
against the Germans. When I became involved in
civil dissensions I conquered Egypt in a sea-fight
off Actium; I defeated Brutus and Cassius at Philippi:
the defeat of Sextus, Pompey's son, was a mere
incident in my campaign. I showed myself so gentle
to the guidance of philosophy that I even put up
with the plain speaking of Athenodorus,<note place='foot'>A Stoic philosopher; cf. pseudo-Lucian, <hi rend='italic'>Long Lives</hi> 21.
23; Suetonius, <hi rend='italic'>Augustus</hi>; Dio Chrysostom 33. 48.</note> and instead
of resenting it I was delighted with it and revered
the man as my preceptor, or rather as though he
were my own father. Areius<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Letter</hi> 51. 434 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>Letter to Themistius</hi> 265 <hi rend='smallcaps'>c</hi>; Themistius
63 <hi rend='smallcaps'>d</hi>.</note> I counted my friend
and close companion, and in short I was never guilty
of any offence against philosophy. But since I saw that
more than once Rome had been brought to the verge
of ruin by internal quarrels, I so administered her
affairs as to make her strong as adamant for all time,
unless indeed, O ye gods, you will otherwise. For I
did not give way to boundless ambition and aim at
enlarging her empire at all costs, but assigned for it
two boundaries defined as it were by nature herself,
the Danube and the Euphrates. Then after conquering
the Scythians and Thracians I did not
employ the long reign that you gods vouchsafed me
in making projects for war after war, but devoted my
leisure to legislation and to reforming the evils that
war had caused. For in this I thought that I was
no less well advised than my predecessors, or rather,
if I may make bold to say so, I was better advised
than any who have ever administered so great an
empire. For some of these, when they might have
remained quiet and not taken the field, kept making
one war an excuse for the next, like quarrelsome
people and their lawsuits; and so they perished in
their campaigns. Others when they had a war
on their hands gave themselves up to indulgence,
and preferred such base indulgence not only to
future glory but even to their personal safety. When
I reflect on all this I do not think myself entitled to
the lowest place. But whatever shall seem good to
you, O ye gods, it surely becomes me to accept with
a good grace.</q>)
</p>

<p>
Δίδοται μετὰ τοῦτον τῷ Τραïανῷ τοῦ λέγειν
ἐξουσία. ὁ δέ, καίπερ δυνάμενος λέγειν, ὑπὸ
ῥᾳθυμίας· [B] ἐπιτρέπειν γὰρ εἰώθει τὰ πολλὰ τῷ
Σούρᾳ γράφειν ὑπὲρ αὑτοῦ· φθεγγόμενος μᾶλλον
ἢ λέγων, ἐπεδείκνυεν αὐτοῖς τό τε Γετικὸν καὶ τὸ
Παρθικὸν τρόπαιον. ᾐτιᾶτο δὲ τὸ γῆρας ὡς οὐκ
ἐπιτρέψαν αὐτῷ τοῖς Παρθικοῖς πράγμασιν ἐπεξελθεῖν.
καὶ ὁ Σειληνός, Ἀλλ᾽, ὦ μάταιε, ἔφη,
εἴκοσι βεβασίλευκας ἔτη, Ἀλέξανδρος δὲ οὑτοσὶ
δώδεκα. τί οὖν ἀφεὶς αἰτιᾶσθαι τὴν σαυτοῦ
τρυφὴν τὴν τοῦ χρόνου μέμφῃ στενότητα; παροξυνθεὶς
οὖν ὑπὸ τοῦ σκώμματος, [C] οὐδὲ γὰρ ἦν
ἔξω τοῦ δύνασθαι ῥητορεύειν, ὑπὸ δὲ τῆς φιλοποσίας
ἀμβλύτερος ἑαυτοῦ πολλάκις ἦν, Ἐγὼ
δέ, εἶπεν, ὦ Ζεῦ καὶ θεοί, τὴν ἀρχὴν παραλαβὼν
ναρκῶσαν ὥσπερ καὶ διαλελυμένην ὑπό τε τῆς
οἴκοι πολὺν χρόνον ἐπικρατησάσης τυραννίδος
καὶ τῆς τῶν Γετῶν ὕβρεως, [D] μόνος ὑπὲρ τὸν Ἴστρον
ἐτόλμησα προσλαβεῖν ἔθνη, καὶ τὸ Γετῶν ἔθνος
ἐξεῖλον, οἳ τῶν πώποτε μαχιμώτατοι γεγόνασιν,
οὐχ ὑπὸ ἀνδρείας μόνον τοῦ σώματος, ἀλλὰ καὶ
ὧν ἔπεισεν αὐτοὺς ὁ τιμώμενος παρ᾽ αὐτοῖς Ζάμολξις.
οὐ γὰρ ἀποθνήσκειν, ἀλλὰ μετοικίζεσθαι
νομίζοντες ἑτοιμότερον αὐτὸ ποιοῦσιν ἢ ἄλλοι<note place='foot'>ἄλλοι Reiske adds.</note>
τὰς ἀποδημίας ὑπομένουσιν. ἐπράχθη δέ μοι τὸ
<pb n='394'/><anchor id='Pg394'/><anchor id='Pg395'/>
ἔργον τοῦτο ἐν ἐνιαυτοῖς ἴσως που πέντε. πάντων
δὲ [328] ὅτι τῶν πρὸ ἐμαυτοῦ<note place='foot'>ἐμαυτοῦ Hertlein suggests, ἐμοῦ MSS.</note> γεγονότων αὐτοκρατόρων
ὤφθην τοῖς ὑπηκόοις πρᾳότατος καὶ οὔτε Καῖσαρ
οὑτοσὶ περὶ τούτων ἀμφισβητήσειεν ἄν μοι οὔτ᾽
ἄλλος οὐδὲ εἷς, εὔδηλόν ἐστί που. πρὸς Παρθυαίους
δέ, πρὶν μὲν ἀδικεῖσθαι παρ᾽ αὐτῶν, οὐκ
ᾤμην δεῖν χρῆσθαι τοῖς ὅπλοις· ἀδικοῦσι δὲ
ἐπεξῆλθον οὐδὲν ὑπὸ τῆς ἡλικίας κωλυθείς, καίτοι
διδόντων μοι τῶν νόμων τὸ μὴ στρατεύεσθαι.
τούτων δὴ τοιούτων ὄντων, [B] ἆρ᾽ οὐχὶ καὶ τιμᾶσθαι
πρὸ τῶν ἄλλων εἰμὶ δίκαιος, πρᾷος μὲν πρὸς τοὺς
ὑπηκόους, φοβερὸς δὲ πρὸς τοὺς πολεμίους διαφερόντως
γενόμενος, αἰδεσθεὶς δὲ καὶ τὴν ὑμετέραν
ἔκγονον<note place='foot'>ἔκγονον Wright, ἔγγονον Hertlein, MSS.</note> φιλοσοφίαν; τοιαῦτα ὁ Τραïανὸς εἰπὼν
ἐδόκει τῇ πρᾳότητι πάντων κρατεῖν, καὶ δῆλοί
πως ἦσαν οἱ θεοὶ μάλιστα ἡσθέντες ἐπὶ τούτῳ.
</p>

<p>
(Trajan was allowed to speak next. Though he had
some talent for oratory he was so lazy that he had
been in the habit of letting Sura write most of his
speeches for him; so he shouted rather than spoke,
and meanwhile displayed to the gods his Getic and
Parthian trophies, while he accused his old age
of not having allowed him to extend his Parthian
conquests. <q>You cannot take us in,</q> said Silenus;
<q>you reigned twenty years and Alexander here only
twelve. Why then do you not put it down to your
own love of ease, instead of complaining of your short
allowance of time?</q> Stung by the taunt, since he
was not deficient in eloquence, though intemperance
often made him seem more stupid than he was,
Trajan began again. <q>O Zeus and ye other gods,
when I took over the empire it was in a sort of
lethargy and much disordered by the tyranny that
had long prevailed at home, and by the insolent
conduct of the Getae. I alone ventured to attack
the tribes beyond the Danube, and I subdued the
Getae, the most warlike race that ever existed, which
is due partly to their physical courage, partly to the
doctrines that they have adopted from their admired
Zamolxis.<note place='foot'>Cf. 309 <hi rend='smallcaps'>c</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Oration</hi> 8. 244 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a</hi> and note.</note> For they believe that they do not die
but only change their place of abode, and they meet
death more readily than other men undertake a
journey. Yet I accomplished that task in a matter
of five years or so. That of all the Emperors who
came before me<note place='foot'><p>For this idiom cf. Milton, <hi rend='italic'>Paradise Lost</hi> 4. 324.
</p>
<p>
<q>Adam the goodliest of men since born<lb/>
His sons, the fairest of her daughters Eve.</q>
</p></note> I was regarded as the mildest in
the treatment of my subjects, is, I imagine, obvious,
and neither Caesar here nor any other will dispute it
with me. Against the Parthians I thought I ought
not to employ force until they had put themselves in
the wrong, but when they did so I marched against
them, undeterred by my age, though the laws would
have allowed me to quit the service. Since then
the facts are as I have said, do I not deserve to be
honoured before all the rest, first because I was so
mild to my subjects, secondly because more than
others I inspired terror in my country's foes, thirdly
because I revered your daughter divine Philosophy?</q>
When Trajan had finished this speech the gods
decided that he excelled all the rest in clemency;
and evidently this was a virtue peculiarly pleasing to
them.)
</p>

<p>
Τοῦ Μάρκου δὲ ἀρχομένου λέγειν, ὁ Σειληνὸς
ἠρέμα πρὸς τὸν Διόνυσον, [C] Ἀκούσωμεν, ἔφη, τοῦ
Στωικοῦ τουτουί, τί ποτε ἄρα τῶν παραδόξων
ἐκείνων ἐρεῖ καὶ τεραστίων δογμάτων. ὁ δὲ ἀποβλέψας
πρὸς τὸν Δία καὶ τοὺς θεούς, Ἀλλ᾽
ἔμοιγε, εἶπεν, ὦ Ζεῦ καὶ θεοί, λόγων οὐδὲν δεῖ καὶ
ἀγῶνος. εἰ μὲν γὰρ ἠγνοεῖτε τἀμά, προσῆκον ἦν
ἐμοὶ διδάσκειν ὑμᾶς· ἐπεὶ δὲ ἴστε καὶ λέληθεν
ὑμᾶς τῶν ἁπάντων οὐδέν, [D] αὐτοί μοι τιμᾶτε τῆς
ἀξίας. ἔδοξε δὴ οὖν ὁ Μάρκος τά τε ἄλλα
<pb n='396'/><anchor id='Pg396'/><anchor id='Pg397'/>
θαυμάσιός τις εἶναι καὶ σοφὸς διαφερόντως ἅτε
οἶμαι διαγινώσκων,
</p>

<p>
(When Marcus Aurelius began to speak, Silenus
whispered to Dionysus, <q>Let us hear which one of
his paradoxes and wonderful doctrines this Stoic will
produce.</q> But Marcus turned to Zeus and the other
gods and said, <q>It seems to me, O Zeus and ye other
gods, that I have no need to make a speech or
to compete. If you did not know all that concerns
me it would indeed be fitting for me to inform you.
But since you know it and nothing at all is hidden
from you, do you of your own accord assign me such
honour as I deserve.</q>
Thus Marcus showed that admirable as he was in
other respects he was wise also beyond the rest,
because he knew)
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<lg>
<l>Λέγειν θ᾽ ὅπου χρὴ καὶ σιγᾶν ὅπου καλόν.</l>
</lg>

<p>
(<q>When it is time to speak and
when to be silent.</q><note place='foot'>Euripides, <hi rend='italic'>fr.</hi> 417 Nauck.</note>)
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Τῷ Κωνσαταντίνῳ μετὰ τοῦτον λέγειν ἐπέτρεπον.
ὁ δὲ πρότερον μὲν ἐθάρρει τὴν ἀγωνίαν.
ὡς δὲ ἀπέβλεπεν εἰς τὰ τῶν ἄλλων ἔργα, μικρὰ
παντάπασιν εἶδε τὰ ἑαυτοῦ. [329] δύο γὰρ τυράννους,
εἴ γε χρὴ τἀληθῆ φάναι, καθῃρήκει, τὸν μὲν
ἀπόλεμον τε καὶ μαλακόν, τὸν δὲ ἄθλιόν τε καὶ
διὰ τὸ γῆρας ἀσθενῆ,<note place='foot'>ἀσθενῆ Sylburg adds.</note> ἀμφοτέρω δὲ θεοῖς τε καὶ
ἀνθρώποις ἐχθίστω. τά γε μὴν εἰς τοὺς βαρβάρους
ἦν γελοῖα αὐτῷ· φόρους γὰρ ὥσπερ
ἐτετελέκαι,<note place='foot'>After ἐτετελέκει Cobet suspects that several words are
lost.</note> καὶ πρὸς τὴν Τρυφὴν ἀφεώρα· πόρρω
δὲ εἱστήκει τῶν θεῶν αὕτη περὶ τὰ πρόθυρα τῆς
Σελήνης· ἐρωτικῶς τε οὖν εἶχεν αὐτῆς, καὶ ὅλος
πρὸς ἐκείνην [B] βλέπων οὐδὲν ἔμελεν αὐτῷ περὶ τῆς
νίκης.<note place='foot'>νίκης Cobet, MSS, δίκης Hertlein, V, M.</note> ἐπεὶ δὲ ἐχρῆν καὶ αὐτὸν εἰπεῖν τι, Ταύτῃ
τούτων κρείττων, ἔφη, εἰμί, τοῦ Μακεδόνος μέν,
ὅτι πρὸς Ῥωμαίους καὶ τὰ Γερμανικὰ καὶ Σκυθικὰ
γένη καὶ οὐχὶ πρὸς τοὺς Ἀσιανοὺς βαρβάρους
ἠγωνισάμην, Καίσαρος δὲ καὶ Ὀκταβιανοῦ
τῷ μή, καθάπερ οὗτοι, πρὸς καλοὺς
κἀγαθοὺς πολίτας στασιάσαι, τοῖς μιαρωτάτοις
δὲ καὶ πονηροτάτοις τῶν τυράννων ἐπεξελθεῖν.
[C] Τραïανοῦ δὲ τοῖς μὲν κατὰ τῶν τυράννων ἀνδραγαθήμασιν
εἰκότως ἂν προτιμηθείην, τῷ δὲ ἣν
οὗτος προσεκτήσατο χώραν ἀναλαβεῖν ἴσος ἂν
οὐκ ἀπεικότως νομιζοίμην, εἰ μὴ καὶ μεῖζον ἐστι
<pb n='398'/><anchor id='Pg398'/><anchor id='Pg399'/>
τὸ ἀνακτήσασθαι τοῦ κτήσασθαι. Μάρκος δὲ
οὑτοσὶ σιωπῶν ὑπὲρ αὑτοῦ πᾶσιν ἡμῖν τῶν
πρωτείων ἐξίσταται. καὶ ὁ Σειληνός, Ἀλλ᾽ ἦ
τοὺς Ἀδώνιδος κήπους ὡς ἔργα ἡμῖν, ὦ Κωνσταντῖνε,
σεαυτοῦ προφέρεις; τί δέ, εἶπεν, εἰσὶν
οὓς λέγεις Ἀδώνιδος κήπους; [D] οὓς αἱ γυναῖκες, ἔφη,
τῷ τῆς Ἀφροδίτης ἀνδρὶ φυτεύουσιν ὀστρακίοις
ἐπαμησάμεναι γῆν λαχανίαν· χλοήσαντα δὲ
ταῦτα πρὸς ὀλίγον αὐτίκα ἀπομαραίνεται. καὶ
ὁ Κωνσταντῖνος ἠρυθρίασεν, ἄντικρυς ἐπιγνοὺς
τοιοῦτον τὸ ἑαυτοῦ ἔργον.
</p>

<p>
(Constantine was allowed to speak next. On first
entering the lists he was confident enough. But
when he reflected on the exploits of the others
he saw that his own were wholly trivial. He had
defeated two tyrants, but, to tell the truth, one
of them<note place='foot'>Maxentius.</note> was untrained in war and effeminate, the
other<note place='foot'>Licinius.</note> a poor creature and enfeebled by old age,
while both were alike odious to gods and men.
Moreover his campaigns against the barbarians
covered him with ridicule. For he paid them
tribute, so to speak, while he gave all his attention
to Pleasure, who stood at a distance from the gods
near the entrance to the moon. Of her indeed he
was so enamoured that he had no eyes for anything
else, and cared not at all for victory. However, as
it was his turn and he had to say something, he
began:
<q>In the following respects I am superior to
these others; to the Macedonian in having fought
against Romans, Germans and Scythians, instead of
Asiatic barbarians; to Caesar and Octavian in that
I did not, like them, lead a revolution against brave
and good citizens, but attacked only the most cruel
and wicked tyrants. As for Trajan, I should naturally
rank higher on account of those same glorious
exploits against the tyrants, while it would be only
fair to regard me as his equal on the score of
that territory which he added to the empire, and I
recovered; if indeed it be not more glorious to regain
than to gain. As for Marcus here, by saying nothing
for himself he yields precedency to all of us.</q> <q>But
Constantine,</q> said Silenus, <q>are you not offering us
mere gardens of Adonis<note place='foot'>A proverb for whatever perishes quickly; cf. Theocritus
15. Frazer, <hi rend='italic'>Attis, Adonis and Osiris</hi>, p. 194.</note> as exploits?</q> <q>What do
you mean,</q> he asked, <q>by gardens of Adonis?</q> <q>I
mean,</q> said Silenus, <q>those that women plant in
pots, in honour of the lover of Aphrodite, by scraping
together a little earth for a garden bed. They bloom
for a little space and fade forthwith.</q> At this
Constantine blushed, for he realised that this was
exactly like his own performance.)
</p>

<p>
Ἡσυχίας δὲ γενομένης οἱ μὲν ἐῴκεσαν περιμένειν,
ὄτῳ θήσονται τὴν ὑπὲρ τῶν πρωτείων οἱ θεοὶ
ψῆφον· οἱ δ᾽ ᾤοντο δεῖν τὰς προαιρέσεις εἰς τοὐμφανὲς
τῶν ἀνδρῶν προάγειν [330] καὶ οὐ κρίνειν ἐκ<note place='foot'>οὐ κρίνειν ἐκ Hertlein suggests, οὐκ ἐκ MSS.</note> τῶν
πεπραγμένων αὐτοῖς, ὧν ἡ Τύχη μετεποιεῖτο τὸ
πλεῖστον καὶ πάντων αὐτῶν καταβοῶσα παρειστήκει
πλὴν Ὀκταβιανοῦ μόνου. τοῦτον δὲ
εὐγνώμονα πρὸς ἑαυτὴν εἶναι ἔλεγεν. ἔδοξεν οὖν
τοῖς θεοῖς ἐπιτρέψαι καὶ τοῦτο τῷ Ἑρμῇ, καὶ
ἔδοσαν αὐτῷ πρῶτον [B] Ἀλεξάνδρου πυθέσθαι, τί
νομίσειε κάλλιστον καὶ πρὸς τί βλέπων ἐργάσαιτο
καὶ πάθοι πάντα ὅσαπερ δεδράκοι τε καὶ
πεπόνθοι. ὁ δὲ ἔφη, Τὸ πάντα νικᾶν. εἶτα,
εἶπεν ὁ Ἑρμῆς, οἴει σοι τοῦτο πεποιῆσθαι; καὶ
μάλα, ἔφη ὁ Ἀλέξανδρος. ὁ δὲ Σειληνὸς τωθαστικῶς
μάλα γελάσας, Ἀλλα ἐκράτουν γέ σου
πολλάκις αἱ ἡμέτεραι θυγατέρες, αἰνιττόμενος τὰς
ἀμπέλους, [C] τὸν Ἀλέξανδρον οἷα δή τινα μέθυσον
<pb n='400'/><anchor id='Pg400'/><anchor id='Pg401'/>
καὶ φίλοινον σκώπτων. καὶ ὁ Ἀλέξανδρος ἅτε
δὴ γέμων Περιπατητικῶν παρακουσμάτων, Οὐ τὰ
ἄψυχα, ἔφη, νικᾶν· οὐδὲ γὰρ ἀγὼν ἡμῖν ἐστι πρὸς
ταῦτα· ἀλλὰ πᾶν μὲν ἀνθρώπων, πᾶν δὲ θηρίων
γένος, καὶ ὁ Σειληνὸς ὥσπερ οἱ θαυμάζοντες
εἰρωνικῶς μάλα, [D] Ἰού, ἰού, ἔφη τῶν διαλεκτικῶν
κιγκλίδων. αὐτὸς δὲ ἡμῖν ἐν ποτέρῳ σαυτὸν
θήσεις γένει, τῶν ἀψύχων ἢ τῶν ἐμψύχων τε καὶ
ζώντων; καὶ ὃς ὥσπερ ἀγανακτήσας, Εὐφήμει,
ἔφη· ὑπὸ γὰρ μεγαλοψυχίας, ὅτι δὴ καὶ θεὸς
γενοίμην, μᾶλλον δ᾽ εἴην, ἐπεπείσμην. Αὐτὸς οὖν,
εἶπεν, ἡττήθης σεαυτοῦ πολλάκις. Ἀλλ᾽ αὐτὸν
ἑαυτοῦ, εἶπεν ὁ Ἀλέξανδρος, κρατεῖν καὶ ἡττᾶσθαι
ὁμωνύμως λέγεται· [331] ἐμοὶ δὲ ἦν ὑπὲρ τῶν πρὸς
ἄλλους ὁ λόγος. Βαβαὶ τῆς διαλεκτικῆς, εἶπεν,
ὅπως ἡμῶν τὰ σοφίσματα διελέγχεις. ἀλλ᾽ ἡνίκα,
εἶπεν, ἐν Ἰνδοῖς ἐτρώθης καὶ ὁ Πευκέστης ἔκειτο
παρὰ σέ, σὺ δὲ ἐξήγου ψυχορραγῶν τῆς πόλεως,
ἆρα ἥττων ἦσθα τοῦ τρώσαντος, ἢ καὶ ἐκεῖνον
ἐνίκας; Οὐκ ἐκεῖνον, ἔφη, μόνον, ἀλλὰ καὶ αὐτὴν
ἐξεπόρθησα τὴν πόλιν. Οὐ σύ γε, εἶπεν, ὦ
μακάριε· σὺ μὲν γὰρ ἔκεισο κατὰ τὸν Ὁμηρικὸν
Ἕκτορα ὀλιγοδρανέων καὶ ψυχορραγῶν· [B] οἱ δὲ
ἠγωνίζοντο καὶ ἐνίκων. Ἡγουμένων γ᾽ ἡμῶν,
εἶπεν ὁ Ἀλέξανδρος. καὶ ὁ Σειληνός, Πῶς; οἵ γε
<pb n='402'/><anchor id='Pg402'/><anchor id='Pg403'/>
ἐφέρεσθε μικροῦ νεκροί; εἶτα ᾖδε τῶν ἐξ Εὐριπίδου
</p>

<p>
(Silence was then proclaimed, and the Emperors
thought they had only to wait till the gods decided
to whom they would vote the first prize. But the
latter agreed that they must bring to light the
motives that had governed each, and not judge them
by their actions alone, since Fortune had the greatest
share in these. That goddess herself was standing
near and kept reproaching all of them, with the
single exception of Octavian; he, she said, had
always been grateful to her. Accordingly the gods
decided to entrust this enquiry also to Hermes, and
he was told to begin with Alexander and to ask him
what he considered the finest of all things, and
what had been his object in doing and suffering all
that he had done and suffered. <q>To conquer the
world,</q> he replied. <q>Well,</q> asked Hermes, <q>do
you think you accomplished this?</q> <q>I do indeed,</q>
said Alexander. Whereupon Silenus with a malicious
laugh exclaimed, <q>But you were often conquered
yourself by my daughters!</q> by which he meant his
vines, alluding to Alexander's love of wine and
intemperate habits. But Alexander was well stocked
with Peripatetic subterfuges, and retorted, <q>Inanimate
things cannot conquer; nor do we contend
with such, but only with the whole race of men and
beasts.</q> <q>Ah,</q> said Silenus, <q>behold the chicanery
of logic! But tell me in which class you place yourself,
the inanimate or the animate and living?</q> At
this he seemed mortified and said, <q>Hush! Such
my greatness of soul that I was convinced that I
should become, or rather that I was already, a god.</q>
<q>At any rate,</q> said Silenus, <q>you were often defeated
by yourself.</q> <q>Nay,</q> retorted Alexander, <q>to
conquer oneself or be defeated by oneself amounts
to the same thing. I was talking of my victories
over other men.</q> <q>No more of your logic!</q> cried
Silenus, <q>how adroitly you detect my sophisms! But
when you were wounded in India,<note place='foot'>At the storming of the capital of the Mallians, probably
the modern city Multan, in 326 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi>, cf. Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Alexander</hi>;
Lucian, <hi rend='italic'>Dialogues of the Dead</hi> 14.</note> and Peucestes<note place='foot'>Peucestes was wounded but saved Alexander's life;
Pliny 34. 8.</note>
lay near you and they carried you out of the town at
your last gasp, were you defeated by him who
wounded you, or did you conquer him?</q> <q>I conquered
him, and what is more I sacked the town as
well.</q> <q>Not you indeed, you immortal,</q> said
Silenus, <q>for you were lying like Homer's Hector in
a swoon and at your last gasp. It was your soldiers
who fought and conquered.</q> <q>Well but I led them,</q>
said Alexander. <q>How so? When you were being
carried away almost dead?</q> And then Silenus
recited the passage in Euripides<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Andromache</hi> 693 foll.: the passage continues <q>Tis not
those who did the work that gain the credit but the general
wins all the glory.</q> Cleitus was killed by Alexander at a
banquet for quoting these verses.</note> beginning)
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<lg>
<l>Οἴμοι, καθ᾽ Ἑλλάδ᾽ ὡς κακῶς νομίζεται,</l>
<l>Ὅταν τρόπαιον πολεμίων στήσῃ στρατός.</l>
</lg>

<p>
(<q>Alas
how unjust is the custom of the Greeks, when
an army triumphs over the enemy&mdash;</q>)
</p>

</quote>

<p>
καὶ ὁ Διόνυσος, Παῦσαι, εἶπεν, ὦ παππίδιον,
τοιαῦτα λέγων, [C] μή σε οὗτος ὁποῖα τὸν Κλεῖτον
ἐργάσηται.<note place='foot'>τὸν Κλεῖτον ἔδρασεν ἐργάσηται MSS.; Hertlein suggests
omission of ἔδρασεν.</note> καὶ ὁ Ἀλέξανδρος ἐρυθριάσας τε
ἅμα καὶ ὥσπερ συγχυθεὶς ὑπὸ τῶν δακρύων τὰ
ὄμματα ἐσιώπα. καὶ ὅδε μὲν ὧδε ἔληξεν ὁ λόγος.
</p>

<p>
(But Dionysus
interrupted him saying <q>Stop, little father, say no
more, or he will treat you as he treated Cleitus.</q> At
that Alexander blushed, his eyes became suffused
with tears and he said no more. Thus their conversation
ended.)
</p>

<p>
Ὁ δὲ Ἑρμῆς ἤρετο πάλιν τὸν Καίσαρα, Σοὶ δέ,
εἶπεν, ὦ Καῖσαρ, τίς ἐγένετο σκοπὸς τοῦ βίου;
Τὸ πρωτεύειν, [D] ἔφη, τῆς ἐμαυτοῦ καὶ μηδενὸς μήτε
εἶναι μήτε νομίζεσθαι<note place='foot'>μήτε εἶναι μήτε νομίζεσθαι Hertlein suggests, εἶναι μήτε
νομίζεσθαι MSS.</note> δεύτερον. Τοῦτο, εἶπεν ὁ
Ἑρμῆς, ἀσαφές ἐστι· πότερον γάρ, εἰπέ,<note place='foot'>εἰπέ Hertlein suggests; cf. 333 <hi rend='smallcaps'>d</hi>, εἶπε MSS.</note> κατὰ
σοφίαν ἢ τὴν ἐν τοῖς λόγοις δεινότητα ἢ πολεμικὴν
ἐμπειρίαν ἢ πολιτικὴν δύναμιν; Ἦν μὲν
οὖν, ἔφη ὁ Καῖσαρ, ἡδύ μοι τῶν πάντων ἐν πᾶσιν
εἶναι πρώτῳ· τούτου δὲ οὐ δυνάμενος ἐπιτυχεῖν τὸ
δύνασθαι μέγιστον παρὰ τοῖς ἐμαυτοῦ πολίταις
ἐζήλωσα. [332] Σὺ δέ, εἶπεν, ἐδυνήθης μέγα; πρὸς αὐτὸν
ὁ Σειληνός. καὶ ὅς, Πάνυ γε, ἔφη· κύριος γοῦν
αὐτῶν ἐγενόμην. Ἀλλὰ τοῦτο μέν, εἶπεν ἐδυνήθης·
ἀγαπηθῆναι δὲ ὑπ᾽ αὐτῶν οὐχ οἷός τε
ἐγένου, καὶ ταῦτα πολλὴν μὲν ὑποκρινάμενος
ὥσπερ ἐν δράματι καὶ σκηνῷ φιλανθρωπίαν,
αἰσχρῶς δὲ αὐτοὺς πάντας κολακεύων. Εἶτα οὖκ
ἀγαπηθῆναι δοκῶ, [B] εἶπεν, ὑπὸ τοῦ δήμου τοῦ διώξαντος
<pb n='404'/><anchor id='Pg404'/><anchor id='Pg405'/>
Βροῦτον καὶ Κάσσιον; Οὐκ ἐπειδή σε
ἀπέκτειναν, ἔφη· διὰ τοῦτο μὲν γὰρ αὐτοὺς ὁ
δῆμος ἐψηφίσατο εἶναι ὑπάτους· ἀλλὰ διὰ τὸ
ἀργύριον, ἐπειδὴ τῶν διαθηκῶν ἀκροασάμενοι
μισθὸν ἑώρων τῆς ἀγανακτήσεως αὐτοῖς οὔτοι<note place='foot'>οὔτοι V, Cobet, οὔτι Hertlein.</note> τὸν
τυχόντα προσεγγεγραμμένον.
</p>

<p>
(Next Hermes began to question Caesar, and said,
<q>And you, Caesar, what was the end and aim of
your life?</q> <q>To hold the first place in my own
country,</q> he replied, <q>and neither to be nor to be
thought second to any man.</q> <q>This,</q> said Hermes,
<q>is not quite clear. Tell me, was it in wisdom that
you wished to be first, or in oratorical skill, or
in military science, or the science of government?</q>
<q>I should have liked well,</q> said Caesar, <q>to be first
of all men in all of these; but as I could not attain
to that, I sought to become the most powerful of my
fellow-citizens.</q> <q>And did you become so very
powerful?</q> asked Silenus. <q>Certainly,</q> he replied,
<q>since I made myself their master.</q> <q>Yes, that you
were able to do; but you could not make yourself
beloved by them, though you played the philanthropic
rôle as though you were acting in a stage-play,
and flattered them all shamefully.</q> <q>What!</q>
cried Caesar, <q>I not beloved by the people? When
they punished Brutus and Cassius!</q> <q>That was not
for murdering you,</q> replied Silenus, <q>since for that
they elected them consuls!<note place='foot'>This is not according to history. The Senate gave
Brutus and Cassius proconsular power in their provinces.</note> No, it was because
of the money you left them. When they had heard
your will read they perceived what a fine reward was
offered them in it for such resentment of your
murder.</q>)
</p>

<p>
[C] Λήξαντος δὲ καὶ τοῦδε τοῦ λόγου, τὸν Ὀκταβιανὸν
αὖθις ὁ Ἑρμῆς ἐκίνει. Σὺ δέ, εἶπεν, οὐκ
ἐρεῖς ἡμῖν, τί κάλλιστον ἐνόμιζες εἶναι; καὶ ὅς,
Βασιλεῦσαι, ἔφη, καλῶς. Τί δέ ἐστι τὸ καλῶς, ὧ
Σεβαστέ, φράσον, ἐπεὶ τοῦτό γε ἔστι καὶ τοῖς
πονηροτάτοις λέγειν. ᾤετο γοῦν καὶ Διονύσιος
καλῶς βασιλεύειν καὶ ὁ τούτου μιαρώτερος Ἀγαθοκλῆς.
Ἀλλ᾽ ἴστε, [D] εἶπεν, ὦ θεοί, ὡς προπέμπων
τὸν θυγατριδοῦν ηὐξάμην ὑμῖν τόλμαν μὲν αὐτῷ
δοῦναι τὴν Καίσαρος, δεινότητα δὲ τὴν Πομπηίου,
τύχην δὲ τὴν ἐμήν. Πολλά, εἶπεν ὁ Σειληνός, καὶ
θεῶν ὄντως σωτήρων ἔργα δεόμενα συνεφόρησεν
οὗτος ὁ κοροπλάθος. Εἶτα διὰ τί τοῦτο, ἔφη, τὸ
ὄνομά μοι γελοῖον οὕτως ἔθου; Ἢ γὰρ οὐκ
ἔπλαττες ἡμῖν, εἶπεν, ὥσπερ ἐκεῖνοι τὰς νύμφας, ὦ
Σεβαστέ, θεούς, ὧν ἕνα καὶ πρῶτον τουτονὶ
Καίσαρα; [333] καὶ ὁ μὲν Ὀκταβιανὸς ὥσπερ δυσωπούμενος
ἀπεσιώπησεν.
</p>

<p>
(When this dialogue ended, Hermes next accosted
Octavian. <q>Now for you,</q> he said, <q>will you please
tell us what <emph>you</emph> thought the finest thing in the
world?</q> <q>To govern well,</q> he replied. <q>You must
say what you mean by <q>well,</q> Augustus. Govern
well! The wickedest tyrants claim to do that.
Even Dionysius,<note place='foot'>Tyrant of Syracuse 405-367 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi></note> I suppose, thought that he governed
well, and so did Agathocles<note place='foot'>Tyrant of Syracuse 317-289 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi></note> who was a still greater
criminal.</q> <q>But you know, O ye gods,</q> said
Octavian, <q>that when I parted with my grandson<note place='foot'>Caius Caesar.</note>
I prayed you to give him the courage of Caesar, the
cleverness of Pompey, and my own good fortune.</q>
<q>What a many things,</q> cried Silenus, <q>that do need
really saving gods have been jumbled together by
this doll-maker!</q> <q>Why pray do you give me that
ridiculous name?</q> asked the other. <q>Why,</q> he replied,
<q>just as they model nymphs did you not
model gods,<note place='foot'>Julian refers to the custom of deifying the Emperors.</note> Augustus, and first and foremost Caesar
here?</q> At this Octavian seemed abashed and said
no more.)
</p>

<p>
Ὁ δὲ Ἑρμῆς πρὸς τὸν Τραïανὸν βλέψας, Σὺ
δέ, εἶπε, τί διανοούμενος ἔπραττες ὅσαπερ ἔπραξας;
Τῶν αὐτῶν Ἀλεξάνδρῳ σωφρονέστερον,
<pb n='406'/><anchor id='Pg406'/><anchor id='Pg407'/>
εἶπεν, ὠρέχθην. καὶ ὁ Σειληνός, Ἡττήθης μὲν
οὖν,<note place='foot'>μὲν οὖν Hertlein suggests, οὖν MSS. καὶ before σὺ Cobet
adds.</note> εἶπε, καὶ σὺ τῶν ἀγεννεστέρων. ὁ μὲν γὰρ
θυμοῦ τὸ πλεῖστον ἥττων ἦν, σὺ δὲ αἰσχρᾶς
ἡδονῆς καὶ ἐπονειδίστου. [B] Βάλλ᾽ εἰς μακαρίαν,
εἶπεν ὁ Διόνυσος, ἐπεὶ σκώπτεις σὺ πάντας
αὐτοὺς καὶ ποιεῖς οὐδὲν ὑπὲρ ἑαυτῶν λέγειν.
ἀλλ᾽ ἐπ᾽ ἐκείνων εἶχέ σοι χώραν τὰ σκώμματα·
πρόσεχε δὲ νῦν, ὅπως ἀντιλήψῃ τοῦ Μάρκου
δοκεῖ γὰρ εἶναί μοί πως ἀνὴρ κατὰ τὸν Σιμωνίδην
τετράγωνος ἄνευ ψόγου τετυγμένος. ὁ Ἑρμῆς
δὲ βλέψας εἰς τὸν Μάρκον, Σοὶ δέ, εἶπεν, ὦ
Βῆρε, τί κάλλιστον ἐδόκει τοῦ βίου τέλος εἶναι;
καὶ ὃς ἠρέμα καὶ σωφρόνως, [C] Τὸ μιμεῖσθαι,
ἔφη, τοὺς θεούς. ἔδοξε μὲν οὖν εὐθέως ἡ
ἀπόκρισις οὐκ ἀγεννής, ἀλλὰ καὶ τοῦ παντὸς
ἀξία. ἀλλὰ καὶ ὁ Ἑρμῆς οὐκ ἐβούλετο πολυπραγμονεῖν,
πεπεισμένος ὅτι πάντα ὁ Μάρκος
ἀκολούθως ἐρεῖ. τοῖς μὲν οὖν ἄλλοις θεοῖς ἐδόκει
ταύτῃ· μόνος δὲ ὁ Σειληνός, Ἀλλ᾽ οὐ μὰ τὸν Διόνυσον
ἀνέξομαι τούτου τοῦ σοφιστοῦ. τί δήποτε
γὰρ ἤσθιες, εἰπέ,<note place='foot'>εἰπέ Hertlein suggests, cf. 331 <hi rend='smallcaps'>d</hi>, εἶπε MSS.</note> [D] καὶ ἔπινες οὐχ ὥσπερ ἡμεῖς ἀμβροσίας
τε καὶ νέκταρος, ἄρτου δὲ καὶ οἴνου; Ἀλλ᾽
ἔγωγε, εἶπεν, οὐχ ᾗπερ οὖν ᾤμην τοὺς θεοὺς μιμεῖσθαι,
ταύτῃ προσεφερόμην σιτία καὶ ποτά· τὸ
σῶμα δὲ ἔτρεφον, ἴσως μὲν ψευδῶς, πειθόμενος
δέ, ὅτι καὶ τὰ ὑμέτερα σώματα δεῖται τῆς
ἐκ τῶν ἀναθυμιάσεων τροφῆς. πλὴν οὐ κατὰ
ταῦτά γε ὑμᾶς εἶναι μιμητέους, ἀλλὰ κατὰ τὴν
διάνοιαν ὑπέλαβον. [334] ὀλίγον ὁ Σειληνὸς διαπορήσας<note place='foot'>διαπορήσας Reiske suggests to complete the construction.</note>
<pb n='408'/><anchor id='Pg408'/><anchor id='Pg409'/>
ὥσπερ ὑπὸ πύκτου δεξιοῦ πληγείς, Εἴρηται μέν
σοι τοῦτο, εἶπε, τυχὸν οὐκ ἀτόπως, ἐμοὶ δέ,
ἔφη, φράσον, τί ποτε ἐνόμιζες εἶναι τὴν τῶν
θεῶν μίμησιν; καὶ ὅς, Δεῖσθαι μὲν ὡς ἐλαχίστων,
εὖ ποιεῖν δὲ ὡς ὅ, τι μάλιστα πλείστους. Μῶν
οὖν, εἶπεν, οὐδενὸς ἐδέου; καὶ ὁ Μάρκος, Ἐγὼ μὲν
οὐδενός, ἴσως δὲ τὸ σωμάτιόν μου μικρῶν. δόξαντος
οὖν [B] καὶ τοῦτο ὀρθῶς εἰρηκέναι τοῦ Μάρκου,
τὸ τέλος ἀπορούμενος ὁ Σειληνὸς ἐπιφύεται τοῖς
περὶ τὸν παῖδα καὶ τὴν γαμετὴν αὐτῷ δοκοῦσιν
οὐκ ὀρθῶς οὐδὲ κατὰ λόγον πεποιῆσθαι, τὴν μὲν
ὅτι ταῖς ἡρωίναις ἐνέγραψε, τῷ δὲ ὅτι τὴν
ἡγεμονίαν ἐπέτρεψεν. Ἐμιμησάμην, εἶπε, καὶ
κατὰ τοῦτο τοὺς θεούς· Ὁμήρῳ μὲν γὰρ ἐπειθόμην
λέγοντι περὶ τῆς γαμετῆς, [C] ὅτι ἄρα, ὅστις ἀγαθὸς
καὶ ἐχέφρων, τὴν αὑτοῦ φιλέει καὶ κήδεται· περὶ
δὲ τοῦ παιδὸς αὐτοῦ τοῦ Διὸς ἀπόφασιν ἔχω·
αἰτιώμενος γὰρ τὸν Ἄρεα, Πάλαι ἄν, εἶπεν,
ἐβέβλησο τῷ κεραυνῷ, εἰ μὴ διὰ τὸ παῖδά σε
εἶναι ἠγάπων. ἄλλως τε καὶ οὐδὲ ᾤμην ἐγὼ
τὸν παῖδα πονηρὸν οὕτως ἔσεσθαι. εἰ δὲ ἡ
νεότης ἐφ᾽ ἑκάτερα μεγάλας ποιουμένη ῥοπὰς
ἐπὶ τὸ χεῖρον ἠνέχθη, οὐχὶ πονηρῷ τὴν ἡγεμονίαν
ἐπέτρεψα, συνηνέχθη δὲ τὸν λαβόντα πονηρὸν
γενέσθαι. [D] τά τε οὖν περὶ τὴν γυναῖκα πεποίηταί
μοι κατὰ ζῆλον Ἀχιλλέως τοῦ θείου, καὶ τὰ
περὶ τὸν παῖδα κατὰ μίμησιν τοῦ μεγίστου Διός,
ἄλλως τε καὶ οὐδὲν καινοτομήσαντι. παισί
τε γὰρ νόμιμον ἐπιτρέπειν τὰς διαδοχάς, καὶ
<pb n='410'/><anchor id='Pg410'/><anchor id='Pg411'/>
τοῦτο ἅπαντες εὔχονται, [335] τήν τε γαμετὴν οὐκ
ἐγὼ πρῶτος, ἀλλὰ μετὰ πολλοὺς ἄλλους ἐτίμησα.
ἴσως δὲ τὸ μὲν ἄρξασθαι τῶν τοιούτων οὐκ
ἔστιν εὔλογον, τὸ δὲ ἐπὶ πολλῶν γενόμενον τοὺς
οἰκειοτάτους ἀποστερεῖν ἐγγὺς ἀδικίας. ἀλλ᾽
ἔλαθον ἐμαυτὸν ἐγὼ μακρότερα ἀπολογούμενος
πρὸς εἰδότας ὑμᾶς, ὦ Ζεῦ καὶ θεοί· διόπερ μοι
τῆς προπετείας ταυτησί συγγνώμονες γένοισθε.
</p>

<p>
(Then Hermes addressing Trajan said, <q>Now you
tell us what was the principle that guided all your
actions?</q> <q>My aims,</q> he replied, <q>were the same
as Alexander's, but I acted with more prudence.</q>
<q>Nay,</q> said Silenus, <q>you were the slave of more
ignoble passions. Anger was nearly always his weak
point, but yours was pleasure of the vilest and most
infamous sort.</q> <q>Plague take you!</q> exclaimed
Dionysus, <q>You keep railing at them all and you
don't let them say a word for themselves. However,
in their case there was some ground for your
sarcasms, but now consider well what you can find
to criticise in Marcus. For in my opinion he is a
man, to quote Simonides, <q>four-square and made
without a flaw.</q></q><note place='foot'>Simonides <hi rend='italic'>fr.</hi> 5 Bergk.</note> Then Hermes addressed Marcus
and said, <q>And you, Verus, what did you think the
noblest ambition in life?</q> In a low voice he answered
modestly, <q>To imitate the gods.</q> This answer they
at once agreed was highly noble and in fact the best
possible. And even Hermes did not wish to cross-examine
him further, since he was convinced that
Marcus would answer every question equally well.
The other gods were of the same mind; only Silenus
cried <q>By Dionysus I shall not let this sophist off so
easily. Why then did you eat bread and drink wine and
not ambrosia and nectar like us?</q> <q>Nay,</q> he replied,
<q>it was not in the fashion of my meat and drink
that I thought to imitate the gods. But I nourished
my body because I believed, though perhaps falsely,
that even your bodies require to be nourished by the
fumes of sacrifice. Not that I supposed I ought to
imitate you in that respect, but rather your minds.</q>
For the moment Silenus was at a loss as though he
had been hit by a good boxer,<note place='foot'>Plato, <hi rend='italic'>Protagoras</hi> 339 <hi rend='smallcaps'>e</hi> ὥσπερ ὑπὸ ἀγαθοῦ πύκτου πληγείς.</note> then he said <q>There
is perhaps something in what you say; but now tell
me what did you think was really meant by <q>imitating
the gods.</q></q> <q>Having the fewest possible needs
and doing good to the greatest possible number.</q>
<q>Do you mean to say,</q> he asked, <q>that you had no
needs at all?</q> <q>I,</q> said Marcus, <q>had none, but
my wretched body had a few, perhaps.</q> Since in
this also Marcus seemed to have answered wisely,
Silenus was at a loss, but finally fastened on what
he thought was foolish and unreasonable in the
Emperor's behaviour to his son and his wife, I mean
in enrolling the latter among the deified and entrusting
the empire to the former. <q>But in that also,</q>
said the other, <q>I did but imitate the gods. I
adopted the maxim of Homer when he says <q>the
good and prudent man loves and cherishes his own
wife,</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Iliad</hi> 9. 343.</note> while as to my son I can quote the excuse of
Zeus himself when he is rebuking Ares: <q>Long ago,</q>
he says, <q>I should have smitten thee with a thunderbolt,
had I not loved thee because thou art my son.</q><note place='foot'>A paraphrase of <hi rend='italic'>Iliad</hi> 5. 897.</note>
Besides, I never thought my son would prove so
wicked. Youth ever vacillates between the extremes
of vice and virtue, and if in the end he inclined
to vice, still he was not vicious when I entrusted the
empire to him; it was only after receiving it that he
became corrupted. Therefore my behaviour to my
wife was modelled on that of the divine Achilles,
and that to my son was in imitation of supreme Zeus.
Moreover, in neither case did I introduce any
novelty. It is the custom to hand down the succession
to a man's sons, and all men desire to do so; as
for my wife I was not the first to decree divine
honours to a wife, for I followed the example of
many others. It is perhaps absurd to have introduced
any such custom, but it would be almost an
injustice to deprive one's nearest and dearest of
what is now long-established. However, I forget
myself when I make this lengthy explanation to you,
O Zeus and ye other gods; for ye know all things.
Forgive me this forwardness.</q>)
</p>

<p>
Παυσαμένου δὲ καὶ τοῦδε τοῦ λόγου, τὸν
Κωνσταντῖνον ὁ Ἑρμῆς ἤρετο, [B] Σὺ δὲ τί καλὸν
ἐνόμισας; Πολλά, εἶπε, κτησάμενον πολλὰ χαρίσασθαι,
ταῖς τ᾽ ἐπιθυμίαις ταῖς ἑαυτοῦ καὶ
ταῖς τῶν φίλων ὑπουργοῦντα. ἀνακαγχάσας
οὖν ὁ Σειληνὸς μέγα, Ἀλλ᾽ ἦ τραπεζίτης εἶναι,
ἔφη, θέλων ἐλελήθεις σεαυτὸν ὀψοποιοῦ καὶ
κομμωτρίας βίον ζῶν;<note place='foot'>ζῶν Cobet, ἄγων Reiske, ἔχων Hertlein, MSS.</note> ᾐνίττετο δ᾽ αὐτὰ πάλαι
μὲν ἥ τε κόμη τό τε εἶδος, ἀτὰρ νῦν καὶ ἡ
γνώμη σοῦ κατηγορεῖ. τούτου μὲν οὖν ὁ Σειληνὸς
πικρότερόν τως καθήψατο.
</p>

<p>
(When Marcus had finished his speech, Hermes
asked Constantine, <q>And what was the height of
<emph>your</emph> ambition?</q> <q>To amass great wealth,</q> he
answered, <q>and then to spend it liberally so as
to gratify my own desires and the desires of my
friends.</q> At this Silenus burst into a loud laugh,
and said, <q>If it was a banker that you wanted
to be, how did you so far forget yourself as to
lead the life of a pastrycook and hairdresser?
Your locks and your fair favour<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Iliad</hi> 3. 55.</note> betokened this
all along, but what you say about your motives
convicts you.</q> Thus did Silenus sharply reprove
Constantine.)
</p>

<p>
[C] Σιωπῆς δὲ γενομένης ἔφερον οἱ θεοὶ λάθρᾳ
τὰς ψήφους. εἶτα ἐγένοντο πολλαὶ τῷ Μάρκῳ.
κοινολογησάμενος δὲ ὁ Ζεὺς ἰδίᾳ πρὸς τὸν πατέρα
προσέταξε κηρῦξαι τῷ Ἑρμῇ. ὁ δὲ ἐκήρυττεν,
Ἄνδρες οἱ παρελθόντες ἐπὶ τουτονὶ τὸν ἀγῶνα,
νόμοι παρ᾽ ἡμῖν εἰσι καὶ κρίσεις τοιαῦται
γίνονται, ὥστε καὶ τὸν νικῶντα χαίρειν καὶ τὸν
ἡττώμενον μὴ μέμφεσθαι. πορεύεσθε οὖν, εἶπεν,
ὅποι φίλον ἑκάστῳ, [D] ὑπὸ θεοῖς ἡγεμόσι βιωσόμενοι
τὸ ἐντεῦθεν· ἑλέσθω δ᾽ ἕκαστος ἑαυτῷ τὸν
προστάτην τε καὶ ἡγεμόνα. μετὰ τὸ κήρυγμα
<pb n='412'/><anchor id='Pg412'/><anchor id='Pg413'/>
τοῦτο ὁ μὲν Ἀλέξανδρος ἔθει πρὸς τὸν Ἡρακλέα,
Ὀκταβιανὸς δὲ πρὸς τὸν Ἀπόλλωνα, ἀμφοῖν
δὲ ἀπρὶξ εἴχετο τοῦ Διὸς καὶ Κρόνου Μάρκος.
πλανώμενον δὲ πολλὰ καὶ περιτρέχοντα τὸν
Καίσαρα κατελεήσας ὁ μέγας Ἄρης ἥ τε
Ἀφροδίτη παρ᾽ ἑαυτοὺς ἀκαλεσάτην· Τραïανὸς
δὲ παρὰ τὸν Ἀλέξανδρον ἔθει ὡς ἐκείνῳ συγκαθεδούμενος.
[336] ὁ δὲ Κωνσταντίνος, οὐχ εὑρίσκων
ἐν θεοῖς τοῦ βίου τὸ ἀρχέτυπον, ἐγγύθεν τὴν
Τρυφὴν κατιδὼν ἔδραμε πρὸς αὐτήν· ἡ δὲ ὑπολαβοῦσα
μαλακῶς καὶ περιβαλοῦσα τοῖς πήχεσι
πέπλοις τε αὐτὸν ποικίλοις ἀσκήσασα καὶ καλλωπίσασα
πρὸς τὴν Ἀσωτίαν ἀπήγαγεν, ἵνα
καὶ τὸν Ἰησοῦν εὑρὼν ἀναστρεφόμενον καὶ
προαγορεύοντα πᾶσιν, <q>Ὅστις φθορεύς, ὅστις
μιαιφόνος, ὅστις ἐναγὴς καὶ βδελυρός, [B] ἴτω θαρρῶν·
ἀποφανῶ γὰρ αὐτὸν τουτῳὶ τῷ ὕδατι λούσας
αὐτίκα καθαρόν, κἂν πάλιν ἔνοχος τοῖς αὐτοῖς
γένηται, δώσω τὸ στῆθος πλήξαντι καὶ τὴν
κεφαλὴν τατάξαντι καθαρῷ γενέσθαι,</q> σφόδρα
ἄσμενος ἐνέτυχεν αὐτῷ, συνεξαγαγὼν τῆς τῶν
θεῶν ἀγορᾶς τοὺς παῖδας. ἐπέτριβον δ᾽ αὐτόν
τε κἀκείνους οὐχ ἧττον τῆς ἀθεότητος οἱ παλαμναῖοι
δαίμονες, αἱμάτων συγγενῶν τιννύμενοι
δίκας, ἕως ὁ Ζεὺς διὰ τὸν Κλαύδιον καὶ Κωνστάντιον
ἔδωκεν ἀναπνεῦσαι.
</p>

<p>
(Then silence was proclaimed and the gods cast a
secret ballot. It turned out that Marcus had most
of the votes. After conferring apart with his father,<note place='foot'>Kronos.</note>
Zeus bade Hermes make a proclamation as follows:
<q>Know all ye mortals who have entered this contest,
that according to our laws and decrees the victor is
allowed to exult but the vanquished must not complain.
Depart then wherever you please, and in
future live every one of you under the guidance of
the gods. Let every man choose his own guardian
and guide.</q>
After this announcement, Alexander hastened to
Heracles, and Octavian to Apollo, but Marcus attached
himself closely to Zeus and Kronos. Caesar wandered
about for a long time and ran hither and thither, till
mighty Ares and Aphrodite took pity on him and
summoned him to them. Trajan hastened to Alexander
and sat down near him. As for Constantine,
he could not discover among the gods the model of
his own career, but when he caught sight of Pleasure,
who was not far off, he ran to her. She received him
tenderly and embraced him, then after dressing him
in raiment of many colours and otherwise making
him beautiful, she led him away to Incontinence.
There too he found Jesus, who had taken up his
abode with her and cried aloud to all comers: <q>He
that is a seducer, he that is a murderer, he that is
sacrilegious and infamous, let him approach without
fear! For with this water will I wash him and will
straightway make him clean. And though he should
be guilty of those same sins a second time, let him
but smite his breast and beat his head and I will
make him clean again.</q> To him Constantine came
gladly, when he had conducted his sons forth from
the assembly of the gods. But the avenging
deities none the less punished both him and them
for their impiety, and exacted the penalty for the
shedding of the blood of their kindred,<note place='foot'>Introduction to Volume I. p. vii.</note> until Zeus
granted them a respite for the sake of Claudius and
Constantius.<note place='foot'>Constantius Chlorus.</note>)
</p>

<pb n='414'/><anchor id='Pg414'/><anchor id='Pg415'/>

<p>
[C] Σοὶ δέ, πρὸς ἡμᾶς λέγων ὁ Ἑρμῆς, δέδωκα τὸν
πατέρα Μίθραν ἐπιγνῶναι· σὺ δ᾽ αὐτοῦ τῶν
ἐντολῶν ἔχου, πεῖσμα καὶ ὅρμον ἀσφαλῆ ζῶντί
τε σεαυτῷ παρασκευάζων, καὶ ἡνίκα ἂν ἐνθένδε
ἀπιέναι δέῃ, μετὰ τῆς ἀγαθῆς ἐλπίδος ἡγεμόνα
θεὸν εὐμενῆ καθιστὰς σεαυτῷ.
</p>

<p>
(<q>As for thee,</q> Hermes said to me, <q>I have
granted thee the knowledge of thy father Mithras.
Do thou keep his commandments, and thus secure
for thyself a cable and sure anchorage throughout
thy life, and when thou must depart from the world
thou canst with good hopes adopt him as thy
guardian god.</q>)
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='418'/><anchor id='Pg418'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Misopogon, Or, Beard-Hater</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Introduction</head>

<p>
Julian came to Antioch on his way to Persia in
the autumn of 361 and stayed there till March, 362.
The city was rich and important commercially, but
in Julian's eyes her glory depended on two things,
the famous shrine of Apollo and the school of
rhetoric; and both of these had been neglected by
the citizens during the reign of Constantius. A
Christian church had been built in Apollo's grove
in the suburb of Daphne, and Libanius, Antioch's most
distinguished rhetorician, was more highly honoured
at Nicomedia.<note place='foot'>cf. Libanius, <hi rend='italic'>Oration</hi> 29. 220, where he warns the people
of Antioch that Caesarea had already robbed them of one
sophist by the offer of a higher salary, and exhorts them not
to neglect rhetoric, the cause of their greatness.</note> Julian's behaviour at Antioch and
his failure to ingratiate himself with the citizens
illustrates one of the causes of the failure of his
Pagan restoration. His mistake was that he did
not attempt to make Paganism popular, whereas
Christianity had always been democratic. He is
always reminding the common people that the true
knowledge of the gods is reserved for philosophers;
and even the old conservative Pagans did
not share his zeal for philosophy. Antioch moreover
was a frivolous city. The Emperor Hadrian three
centuries earlier had been much offended by the
levity of her citizens, and the homilies of Saint
<pb n='419'/><anchor id='Pg419'/>
Chrysostom exhibit the same picture as Julian's
satire. His austere personality and mode of life
repelled the Syrian populace and the corrupt officials
of Antioch. They satirised him in anapaestic verses,
and either stayed away from the temples that he
restored or, when they did attend in response to his
summons, showed by their untimely applause of the
Emperor that they had not come to worship his gods.
Julian's answer was this satire on himself which he
addresses directly to the people of Antioch. But he
could not resist scolding them, and the satire on his
own habits is not consistently maintained. After he
had left the city the citizens repented and sent a
deputation to make their peace with him, but in
spite of the intercession of Libanius, who had accompanied
him to Antioch, he could not forgive the
insults to himself or the irreverence that had been
displayed to the gods.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='420'/><anchor id='Pg420'/><anchor id='Pg421'/>

<div>

<p>
[337] ΙΟΥΛΙΑΝΟΥ ΑΥΤΟΚΡΑΤΟΡΟΣ
</p>

<p>
(Julian, Emperor)
</p>

<p>
ΑΝΤΙΟΧΙΚΟΣ<note place='foot'>"The Discourse at Antioch" is an alternative title in
the MSS.</note> Η ΜΙΣΟΠΩΓΩΝ
</p>

<p>
(Antiochene, or Beard-Hater)
</p>

<p>
Ἀνακρέοντι τῷ ποιητῇ πολλὰ ἐποιήθη μέλη
χαρίεντα· τρυφᾶν γὰρ ἔλαχεν ἐκ μοιρῶν· Ἀλκαίῳ
δ᾽ οὐκέτι οὐδ᾽ Ἀρχιλόχῳ τῷ Παρίῳ τὴν
μοῦσαν ἔδωκεν ὁ θεὸς εἰς εὐφροσύνας καὶ ἡδονὰς
τρέψαι· μοχθεῖν γὰρ ἄλλοτε ἄλλως ἀναγκαζόμενοι
τῇ μουσικῇ πρὸς τοῦτο ἐχρῶντο, [B] κουφότερα
ποιοῦντες αὑτοῖς ὅσα ὁ δαίμων ἐδίδου τῇ εἰς τοὺς
ἀδικοῦντας λοιδορίᾳ. ἐμοὶ δὲ ἀπαγορεύει μὲν ὁ
νόμος ἐπ᾽ ὀνόματος αἰτιᾶσθαι τοὺς ἀδικουμένους
μὲν οὐδέν, εἶναι δ᾽ ἐπιχειροῦντας δυσμενεῖς, ἀφαιρεῖται
δὲ τὴν ἐν τοῖς μέλεσι μουσικὴν ὁ νῦν ἐπικρατῶν
ἐν τοῖς ἐλευθέροις τῆς παιδείας τρόπος.
αἴσχιον γὰρ εἶναι δοκεῖ νῦν μουσικὴν ἐπιτηδεύειν,
ἢ πάλαι ποτὲ ἐδόκει τὸ πλουτεῖν ἀδίκως. [C] οὐ μὴν
ἀφέξομαι διὰ τοῦτο τῆς ἐμοὶ δυνατῆς ἐκ μουσῶν
ἐπικουρίας. ἐθεασάμην τοι καὶ τοὺς ὑπὲρ τὸν
<pb n='422'/><anchor id='Pg422'/><anchor id='Pg423'/>
Ῥῆνον βαρβάρους ἄγρια μέλη λέξει πεποιημένα
παραπλησίᾳ τοῖς κρωγμοῖς τῶν τραχὺ βοώντων
ὀρνόθων ᾄδοντας καὶ εὐφραινομένους ἐπὶ τοῖς
μέλεσιν. [338] εἶναι γὰρ οἶμαι συμβαίνει τοῖς φαύλοις
τὴν μουσικὴν λυπηροῖς μὲν τοῖς θεάτροις, σφίσι
δ᾽ αὐτοῖς ἡδίστοις. ὁ δὴ καὶ αὐτὸς ξυννοήσας
εἴωθα πρὸς ἐμαυτὸν λέγειν ὅπερ ὁ Ἰσμηνίας οὐκ
ἀπὸ τῆς ἴσης μὲν ἕξεως, ἀπὸ δὲ τῆς ὁμοίας, ὡς
ἐμαυτὸν πείθω, μεγαλοφροσύνης, ὅτι δῆτα ταῖς
μούσαις ᾄδω καὶ ἐμαυτῷ.
</p>

<p>
(Anacreon the poet composed many delightful
songs; for a luxurious life was allotted to him by
the Fates. But Alcaeus and Archilochus of Paros<note place='foot'>In the seventh century <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> Alcaeus of Lesbos and
Archilochus both suffered exile, and the latter fell in battle
against Naxos. For the misfortunes of Alcaeus, cf. Horace,
<hi rend='italic'>Odes</hi> 2. 13.</note>
the god did not permit to devote their muse to
mirth and pleasure. For constrained as they were
to endure toil, now of one sort, now of another, they
used their poetry to relieve their toil, and by
abusing those who wronged them they lightened
the burdens imposed on them by Heaven. But
as for me, the law forbids me to accuse by name
those who, though I have done them no wrong, try
to show their hostility to me; and on the other
hand the fashion of education that now prevails
among the well-born deprives me of the use of the
music that consists in song. For in these days men
think it more degrading to study music than once in
the past they thought it to be rich by dishonest
means. Nevertheless I will not on that account
renounce the aid that it is in my power to win from
the Muses. Indeed I have observed that even the
barbarians across the Rhine sing savage songs composed
in language not unlike the croaking of harsh-voiced
birds, and that they delight in such songs.
For I think it is always the case that inferior
musicians, though they annoy their audiences, give
very great pleasure to themselves. And with this in
mind I often say to myself, like Ismenias&mdash;for though
my talents are not equal to his, I have as I persuade
myself a similar independence of soul&mdash;<q>I sing for
the Muses and myself.</q><note place='foot'>For Ismenias of Thebes cf. Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Pericles</hi>. The saying
became a proverb; cf. Dio Chrysostom, <hi rend='italic'>Oration</hi> 78. 420;
Themistius 366 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b</hi>; Burton, <hi rend='italic'>Anatomy of Melancholy</hi>, <q>I have
lived <hi rend='italic'>mihi et Musis</hi> in the University.</q></note>)
</p>

<p>
Τὸ δ᾽ ᾆσμα πεζῇ μὲν λέξει πεποίηται, λοιδορίας
δ᾽ ἔχει πολλὰς καὶ μεγάλας, οὐκ εἰς ἄλλους μὰ
Δία· [B] πῶς γάρ; ἀπαγορεύοντος τοῦ νόμου· εἰς
δὲ τὸν ποιητὴν αὐτὸν καὶ τὸν ξυγγραφέα. τὸ γὰρ
εἰς ἑαυτὸν γράφειν εἴτε ἐπαίνους εἴτε ψόγους
εἴργει νόμος οὐδείς. ἐπαινεῖν μὲν δὴ καὶ σφόδρα
ἐθέλων ἐμαυτὸν οὐκ ἔχω, ψέγειν δὲ μυρία, καὶ
πρῶτον ἀρξάμενος ἀπὸ τοῦ προσώπου. τούτῳ
γὰρ οἶμαι φύσει γεγονότι μὴ λίαν καλῷ μηδ᾽
εὐπρεπεῖ μηδ᾽ ὡραίῳ ὑπὸ δυστροπίας καὶ δυσκολίας
αὐτὸς [C] προστέθεικα τὸν βαθὺν τουτονὶ
πώγωνα, δίκας αὐτὸ πραττόμενος, ὡς ἔοικεν, οὐδενὸς
μὲν ἄλλου, τοῦ δὲ μὴ φύσει γενέσθαι καλόν.
ταῦτά τοι διαθεόντων ἀνέχομαι τῶν φθειρῶν
ὥσπερ ἐν λόχμῃ τῶν θηρίων. ἐσθίειν δὲ λάβρως
ἢ πίνειν χανδὸν οὐ συγχωροῦμαι· δεῖ γὰρ οἶμαι
προσέχειν, μὴ λάθω συγκαταφαγὼν<note place='foot'>συγκαταφαγὼν Cobet, καὶ συγκαταφαγὼν Hertlein, MSS.</note> τὰς τρίχας
<pb n='424'/><anchor id='Pg424'/><anchor id='Pg425'/>
τοῖς ἄρτοις. [D] ὑπὲρ δὲ τοῦ φιλεῖσθαι καὶ φιλεῖν
ἥκιστα ἀλγῶ. καίτοι καὶ τοῦτο ἔχειν ἔοικεν ὁ
πώγων ὥσπερ τὰ ἄλλα λυπηρόν, οὐκ ἐπιτρέπων
καθαρὰ λείοις καὶ διὰ τοῦτο οἶμαι γλυκερώτερα
χείλεσι χείλη προσμάττειν, ὅπερ ἤδη τις ἔφη τῶν
ἐργασαμένων ξὺν τῷ Πανὶ καὶ τῇ Καλλιόπῃ εἰς
τὸν Δάφνιν ποιήματα. ὑμεῖς δέ φατε δεῖν καὶ
σχοινία πλέκειν ἐνθένδε· καὶ ἕτοιμος παρέχειν,
ἢν μόνον ἕλκειν δυνηθῆτε καὶ μὴ τὰς ἀτρίπτους
ὑμῶν καὶ μαλακὰς χεῖρας ἡ τραχύτης αὐτῶν
δεινὰ ἐργάσηται. νομίσηι δὲ μηδεὶς δυσχεραίνειν
ἐμὲ τῷ σκώμματι. [339] δίδωμι γὰρ αὐτὸς τὴν αἰτίαν
ὥσπερ οἱ τράγοι τὸ γένειον ἔχων, ἐξὸν οἶμαι λεῖον
αὐτὸ ποιεῖν καὶ ψιλόν, ὁποῖον οἱ καλοὶ τῶν παίδων
ἔχουσιν ἅπασαί τε αἱ γυναῖκες, αἷς φύσει
πρόσεστι τὸ ἐράσμιον. ὑμεῖς δὲ καὶ ἐν τῷ γήρᾳ
ζηλοῦντες τοὺς ὑμῶν αὐτῶν υἱέας καὶ τὰς θυγατέρας
ὑπὸ ἁβρότητος βίου καὶ ἴσως ἁπαλότητος
τρόπου λεῖον ἐπιμελῶς ἐργάζεσθε, τὸν ἄνδρα
ὑποφαίνοντες [B] καὶ παραδεικνύντες διὰ τοῦ μετώπου
καὶ οὐχ ὥσπερ ἡμεῖς ἐκ τῶν γνάθων.
</p>

<p>
(However the song that I now sing has been
composed in prose, and it contains much violent
abuse, directed not, by Zeus, against others&mdash;how
could it be, since the law forbids?&mdash;but against the
poet and author himself. For there is no law to
prevent one's writing either praise or criticism of
oneself. Now as for praising myself, though I should
be very glad to do so, I have no reason for that; but
for criticising myself I have countless reasons, and
first I will begin with my face. For though nature
did not make this any too handsome or well-favoured
or give it the bloom of youth, I myself out of sheer
perversity and ill-temper have added to it this long
beard of mine, to punish it, as it would seem, for
this very crime of not being handsome by nature.
For the same reason I put up with the lice that
scamper about in it as though it were a thicket for
wild beasts. As for eating greedily or drinking with
my mouth wide open, it is not in my power; for I
must take care, I suppose, or before I know it I shall
eat up some of my own hairs along with my crumbs
of bread. In the matter of being kissed and kissing
I suffer no inconvenience whatever. And yet for
this as for other purposes a beard is evidently
troublesome, since it does not allow one to press
shaven <q>lips to other lips more sweetly</q>&mdash;because
they are smooth, I suppose&mdash;as has been said already
by one of those who with the aid of Pan and
Calliope composed poems in honour of Daphnis.<note place='foot'>Daphnis is the hero of bucolic poetry; Julian echoes
Theocritus 12. 32 ὃς δέ κε προσμάξῃ γλυκερώτερα χείλεσι χείλη.</note>
But you say that I ought to twist ropes from it!
Well I am willing to provide you with ropes if only
you have the strength to pull them and their
roughness does not do dreadful damage to your
<q>unworn and tender hands.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Odyssey</hi> 22. 151; cf. Zonaras 13. 12. 213, Dindorf.</note> And let no one
suppose that I am offended by your satire. For
I myself furnish you with an excuse for it
by wearing my chin as goats do, when I might,
I suppose, make it smooth and bare as handsome
youths wear theirs, and all women, who
are endowed by nature with loveliness. But you,
since even in your old age you emulate your own
sons and daughters by your soft and delicate way
of living, or perhaps by your effeminate dispositions,
carefully make your chins smooth, and your manhood
you barely reveal and slightly indicate by your
foreheads, not by your jaws as I do.)
</p>

<p>
Ἐμοὶ δὲ οὐκ ἀπέχρησε μόνον ἡ βαθύτης τοῦ
γενείου, ἀλλὰ καὶ τῇ κεφαλῇ πρόσεστιν αὐχμός,
καὶ ὀλιγάκις κείρομαι καὶ ὀνυχίζομαι, καὶ τοὺς
δακτύλους ὑπὸ τοῦ καλάμου τὰ πολλὰ ἔχω
μέλανας. εἰ δὲ βούλεσθέ τι καὶ τῶν ἀπορρήτων
μαθεῖν, ἔστι μοι τὸ στῆθος δασὺ καὶ λάσιον ὥσπερ
<pb n='426'/><anchor id='Pg426'/><anchor id='Pg427'/>
τῶν λεόντων, οἵπερ βασιλεύουσι τῶν θηρίων, οὐδὲ
ἐποίησα λεῖον αὐτὸ πώποτε διὰ δυσκολίαν καὶ
μικροπρέπειαν, [C] οὐδὲ ἄλλο τι μέρος τοῦ σώματος
εἰργασάμην λεῖον οὐδὲ μαλακόν. εἶπον γ᾽ ἂν
ὑμῖν, εἴ τις ἦν μοι καὶ ἀκροχορδὼν ὥσπερ τῷ
Κικέρωνι·<note place='foot'>Κικέρωνι Naber, cf. Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Cicero</hi>, Κίμωνι Hertlein,
MSS.</note> νυνὶ δ᾽ οὐκ ἔστι. καὶ εἰ<note place='foot'>εἰ Reiske, ἃ Hertlein, MSS.</note> συγγινώσκετε,
φράσω ὑμῖν καὶ<note place='foot'>ὑμῖν καὶ Reiske, μὲν Hertlein, MSS.</note> ἕτερον. ἐμοὶ γὰρ οὐκ
ἀπόχρῃ τὸ σῶμα εἶναι τοιοῦτο, πρὸς δὲ καὶ δίαιτα
παγχάλεπος ἐπιτηδεύεται. εἴργω τῶν θεάτρων
ἐμαυτὸν ὑπ᾽ ἀβελτηρίας, οὐδ᾽ εἴσω τῆς αὐλῆς
παραδέχομαι τὴν θυμέλην ἔξω τῆς νουμηνίας τοῦ
ἔτους ὑπ᾽ ἀναισθησίας, [D] ὥσπερ τινὰ φόρον ἢ
δασμὸν εἰσφέρων καὶ ἀποδιδοὺς ἄγροικος ὀλίγα
ἔχων οὐκ ἐπιεικεῖ δεσπότῃ. καὶ τότε δὲ εἰσελθὼν
τοῖς ἀφοσιουμένοις ἔοικα. κέκτημαι δὲ οὐδένα,
καὶ ταῦτα βασιλεὺς ἀκούων μέγας, ὃς καθάπερ
ὕπαρχος ἢ στρατηγὸς διὰ πάσης τῆς οἰκουμένης
ἄρξει τῶν μίμων καὶ τῶν ἡνιόχων· ὅπερ ὑμεῖς
ὁρῶντες ὀλίγῳ πρότερον
</p>

<p>
(But as though the mere length of my beard were
not enough, my head is dishevelled besides, and I
seldom have my hair cut or my nails, while my
fingers are nearly always black from using a pen.
And if you would like to learn something that
is usually a secret, my breast is shaggy, and covered
with hair, like the breasts of lions who among wild
beasts are monarchs like me, and I have never in my
life made it smooth, so ill-conditioned and shabby
am I nor have I made any other part of my
body smooth or soft. If I had a wart like Cicero,<note place='foot'>cf. Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Cicero</hi>, who says that Cicero had a wart on
his nose.</note> I
would tell you so; but as it happens I have none.
And by your leave I will tell you something else. I
am not content with having my body in this rough
condition, but in addition the mode of life that I
practise is very strict indeed. I banish myself from
the theatres, such a dolt am I, and I do not admit
the thymele<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> the altar of Dionysus which was set up in the
orchestra.</note> within my court except on the first day
of the year, because I am too stupid to appreciate
it; like some country fellow who from his small
means has to pay a tax or render tribute to a harsh
master. And even when I do enter the theatre I
look like a man who is expiating a crime. Then
again, though I am entitled a mighty Emperor,
I employ no one to govern the mimes and chariot-drivers
as my lieutenant or general throughout the
inhabited world. And observing this recently,)
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 24'>ἀναμιμνήσκεσθε νῦν</l>
<l>ἥβης ἐκείνης νοῦ τ᾽ ἐκείνου καὶ φρενῶν.<note place='foot'>ἀναμιμνήσκεσθε&mdash;φρενῶν Hertlein writes as prose; Brambs
identified as a fragment of Cratinus.</note></l>
</lg>

<p>
(<q>You
now recall that youth of his, his wit and wisdom.</q><note place='foot'>Cratinus, <hi rend='italic'>Eunidae</hi> <hi rend='italic'>fr.</hi> 1; cf. Synesius, <hi rend='italic'>Epistle</hi> 129; Julian
refers to Constantius, whom the people of Antioch now compare
with him.</note>)
</p>

</quote>

<p>
[340] Ἦν μὲν οὖν ἴσως καὶ τοῦτο βαρὺ καὶ δεῖγμα
ἐναργὲς μοχθηρίας τρόπου· προστίθημι δὲ ἐγώ
τι καινότερον ἀεί· μισῶ τὰς ἱπποδρομίας, ὥσπερ
οἱ χρήματα ὠφληκότες τὰς ἀγοράς. ὀλιγάκις
οὖν εἰς αὐτὰς φοιτῶ ἐν ταῖς ἑορταῖς τῶν θεῶν
<pb n='428'/><anchor id='Pg428'/><anchor id='Pg429'/>
οὐδὲ διημερεύω, καθάπερ εἰώθεσαν ὅ τε ἀνεψιὸς
ὁ ἐμὸς καὶ ὁ θεῖος καὶ ὁ ἀδελφὸς ὁ ὁμοπάτριος.
ἓξ δὲ τοὺς πάντας θεώμενος δρόμους, οὐδ᾽ αὐτοὺς
ὡς ἄν τις ἐρῶν [B] τοῦ πράγματος ἢ ναὶ μὰ Δία μὴ
μισῶν αὐτὸ μηδὲ ἀποστρεφόμενος, ἄσμενος ἀπαλλάττομαι.
</p>

<p>
(Perhaps you had this other grievance and clear
proof of the worthlessness of my disposition&mdash;for
I keep on adding some still more strange characteristic&mdash;I
mean that I hate horse-races as men who
owe money hate the market-place. Therefore I
seldom attend them, only during the festivals of the
gods; and I do not stay the whole day as my cousin<note place='foot'>Constantius.</note>
used to do, and my uncle<note place='foot'>Count Julian who had been Governor of Antioch. cf.
<hi rend='italic'>Letter</hi> 13.</note> and my brother and my
father's son.<note place='foot'>Gallus his half-brother.</note> Six races are all that I stay to see,
and not even those with the air of one who loves
the sport, or even, by Zeus, with the air of one who
does not hate and loathe it, and I am glad to get
away.)
</p>

<p>
Ἀλλὰ τὰ μὲν ἔξω ταῦτα· καίτοι πόστον
εἴρηταί μοι μέρος τῶν ἐμῶν εἰς ὑμᾶς ἀδικημάτων;
τὰ δὲ ἔνδον ἄγρυπνοι νύκτες ἐν στιβάδι, καὶ
τροφὴ παντὸς ἥττων κόρου πικρὸν ἦθος ποιεῖ
καὶ τρυφώσῃ πόλει πολέμιον. οὐ μὴν ὑμῶν·
γ᾽ ἕνεκα τοῦτο ἐπιτηδεύεται παρ᾽ ἐμοῦ· δεινὴ
δέ τις ἐκ παιδαρίου με καὶ ἀνόητος ἀπάτη
καταλαβοῦσα τῇ γαστρὶ πολεμεῖν ἔπεισεν, οὐδὲ
ἐπιτρέπω [C] πολλῶν ἐμπίμπλασθαι σιτίων αὐτῇ.
ὀλιγιστάκις<note place='foot'>ὀλιγιστάκις Hertlein suggests, ὀλιγάκις MSS.</note> οὖν ἐμοὶ τῶν πάντων ἐμέσαι συνέβη.
καὶ μέμνημαι αὐτὸ παθὼν ἐξ ὅτου καῖσαρ ἐγενόμην
ἅπαξ ἀπὸ συμπτώματος, οὐ πλησμονῆς.
ἄξιον δὲ ὑπομνησθῆναι διηγήματος οὐδὲ αὐτοῦ
πάνυ χαρίεντος, ἐμοὶ δὲ διὰ τοῦτο μάλιστα
οἰκείου.
</p>

<p>
(But all these things are externals; and indeed
what a small fraction of my offences against you
have I described! But to turn to my private life
within the court. Sleepless nights on a pallet and
a diet that is anything rather than surfeiting make
my temper harsh and unfriendly to a luxurious city
like yours. However it is not in order to set an
example to you that I adopt these habits. But in
my childhood a strange and senseless delusion came
over me and persuaded me to war against my belly,
so that I do not allow it to fill itself with a great
quantity of food. Thus it has happened to me most
rarely of all men to vomit my food. And though I
remember having this experience once, after I
became Caesar, it was by accident and was not due
to over-eating. It may be worth while to tell the
story which is not in itself very graceful, but for
that very reason is especially suited to me.)
</p>

<p>
[D] Ἐτύγχανον ἐγὼ χειμάζων περὶ τὴν φίλην
Λουκετίαν· ὀνομάζουσι δ᾽ οὕτως οἱ Κελτοὶ τῶν
Παρισίων τὴν πολίχνην· ἔστι δ᾽ οὐ μεγάλη νῆσος
ἐγκειμένη τῷ ποταμῷ, καὶ αὐτὴν κύκλῳ πᾶσαν
τεῖχος περιλαμβάνει,<note place='foot'>περιλαμβάνει Cobet, καταλαμβάνει Hertlein, MSS.</note> ξύλιναι δ᾽ ἐπ᾽ αὐτὴν
ἀμφοτέρωθεν εἰσάγουσι γέφυραι, καὶ ὀλιγάκις
ὁ ποταμὸς ἐλαττοῦται καὶ μείζων γένεται, τὰ
πολλὰ δ᾽ ἔστιν ὁποῖος ὥρᾳ θέρους καὶ χειμῶνος,
<pb n='430'/><anchor id='Pg430'/><anchor id='Pg431'/>
ὕδωρ ἥδιστον καὶ καθαρώτατον ὁρᾶν καὶ πίνειν
ἐθέλοντι παρέχων. ἅτε γὰρ νῆσον οἰκοῦντας
ὑδρεύεσθαι μάλιστα ἐνθένδε χρή. γίνεται δὲ
[341] καὶ ὁ χειμὼν ἐκεῖ πρᾳότερος εἴτε ὑπὸ τῆς θέρμης
τοῦ ὠκεανοῦ· στάδια γὰρ ἀπέχει τῶν ἐννακοσίων
οὐ πλείω, καὶ διαδίδοται τυχὸν λεπτή τις αὔρα
τοῦ ὕδατος, εἶναι δὲ δοκεῖ θερμότερον τὸ θαλάττιον
τοῦ γλυκέος· εἴτε οὖν ἐκ ταύτης εἴτε ἐκ τινος
ἄλλης αἰτίας ἀφανοῦς ἐμοί, τὸ πρᾶγμα ἐστι
τοιοῦτον, ἀλεεινότερον ἔχουσιν οἱ τὸ χωρίον
οἰκοῦντες τὸν χειμῶνα, καὶ φύεται παρ᾽ αὐτοῖς
ἄμπελος ἀγαθή, καὶ συκᾶς ἤδη εἰσιν οἳ<note place='foot'>εἰσιν οἳ Cobet, τινές εἰσιν οἳ Hertlein, MSS.</note> ἐμηχανήσαντο,
σκεπάζοντες [B] αὐτὰς τοῦ χειμῶνος ὥσπερ
ἱματίοις τῇ καλάμῃ τοῦ πυροῦ καὶ τοιούτοις
τισίν, ὅσα εἴωθεν εἴργειν τὴν ἐκ τοῦ ἀέρος
ἐπιγιγνομένην τοῖς δένδροις βλάβην. ἐγένετο δὴ
οὖν ὁ χειμὼν τοῦ εἰωθότος σφοδρότερος, καὶ
παρέφερεν ὁ ποταμὸς ὥσπερ μαρμάρου πλάκας·
ἴστε δήπου τὸν Φρύγιον λίθον τὸν λευκόν· τούτῳ
ἐῴκει μάλιστα τὰ κρύσταλλα,<note place='foot'>τὸν&mdash;κρύσταλλα Hertlein suggests, ᾧ ἐῴικει μάλιστα τοῦ
λευκοῦ τούτου τὰ κρύσταλλα, MSS.</note> μεγάλα καὶ
ἐπάλληλα φερόμενα· καὶ δὴ καὶ συνεχῆ ποιεῖν
ἤδη τὸν πόρον ἔμελλε [C] καὶ τὸ ῥεῦμα γεφυροῦν.
ὡς οὖν ἐν τούτοις ἀγριώτερος ἦν τοῦ συνήθους,
ἐθάλπετο δὲ τὸ δωμάτιον οὐδαμῶς, οὗπερ ἐκάθευδον,
ὅνπερ εἰώθει τρόπον ὑπογαίοις<note place='foot'>ὑπογαίοις Naber, cf. Pliny <hi rend='italic'>Ep.</hi> 2. 17; ὑπὸ ταῖς Hertlein,
MSS.</note> καμίνοις
τὰ πολλὰ τῶν οἰκημάτων ἐκεῖ θερμαίνεσθαι,
καὶ ταῦτα ἔχον εὐτρεπῶς πρὸς τὸ παραδέξασθαι
τὴν ἐκ τοῦ πυρὸς ἀλέαν· συνέβη δ᾽ οἶμαι καῖ
<pb n='432'/><anchor id='Pg432'/><anchor id='Pg433'/>
τότε διὰ σκαιότητα τὴν ἐμὴν καὶ τὴν εἰς ἐμαυτὸν
πρῶτον, ὡς εἰκός, ἀπανθρωπίαν· ἐβουλόμην γὰρ
ἐθίζειν ἐμαυτὸν ἀνέχεσθαι τὸν ἀέρα ταύτης
ἀνενδεῶς ἔχοντα τῆς βοηθείας. ὡς δὲ ὁ χειμὼν
ἐπεκράτει καὶ ἀεὶ μείζων ἐπεγίνετο, [D] θερμῆναι
μὲν οὐδ᾽ ὣς ἐπέτρεψα τοῖς ὑπηρέταις τὸ οἴκημα,
δεδιὼς κινῆσαι τὴν ἐν τοῖς τοίχοις ὑγρότητα,
κομίσαι δ᾽ ἔνδον ἐκέλευσα πῦρ κεκαυμένον καὶ
ἄνθρακας λαμπροὺς ἀποθέσθαι παντελῶς μετρίους.
οἱ δὲ καίπερ ὄντες οὐ πολλοὶ παμπληθεῖς ἀπὸ
τῶν τοίχων ἀτμοὺς ἐκίνησαν, ὑφ᾽ ὧν κατέδαρθον.
ἐμπιμπλαμένης δέ μοι τῆς κεφαλῆς ἐδέησα μὲν
ἀποπνιγῆναι, [342] κομισθεὶς δ᾽ ἔξω, τῶν ἰατρῶν
παραινούντων ἀπορρῖψαι τὴν ἐντεθεῖσαν ἄρτι
τροφήν, οὔτι μὰ Δία πολλὴν οὖσαν, ἐξέβαλον,
καὶ ἐγενόμην αὐτίκα ῥᾴων, ὥστε μοι γενέσθαι
κουφοτέραν τὴν νύκτα καὶ τῆς ὑστεραίας πράττειν
ὄ,τιπερ ἐθέλοιμι.
</p>

<p>
(I happened to be in winter quarters at my beloved
Lutetia&mdash;for that is how the Celts call the capital of
the Parisians. It is a small island lying in the river;
a wall entirely surrounds it, and wooden bridges
lead to it on both sides. The river seldom rises and
falls, but usually is the same depth in the winter as
in the summer season, and it provides water which is
very clear to the eye and very pleasant for one who
wishes to drink. For since the inhabitants live on
an island they have to draw their water chiefly from
the river. The winter too is rather mild there,
perhaps from the warmth of the ocean, which is not
more than nine hundred stades distant, and it may
be that a slight breeze from the water is wafted so
far; for sea water seems to be warmer than fresh.
Whether from this or from some other cause obscure
to me, the fact is as I say, that those who live in
that place have a warmer winter. And a good kind
of vine grows thereabouts, and some persons have
even managed to make fig-trees grow by covering
them in winter with a sort of garment of wheat
straw and with things of that sort, such as are used
to protect trees from the harm that is done them by
the cold wind. As I was saying then, the winter
was more severe than usual, and the river kept
bringing down blocks like marble. You know, I
suppose, the white stone that comes from Phrygia;
the blocks of ice were very like it, of great size, and
drifted down one after another; in fact it seemed
likely that they would make an unbroken path and
bridge the stream. The winter then was more
inclement than usual, but the room where I slept
was not warmed in the way that most houses are
heated, I mean by furnaces underground; and that
too though it was conveniently arranged for letting
in heat from such a fire. But it so happened
I suppose, because I was awkward then as now, and
displayed inhumanity first of all, as was natural,
towards myself. For I wished to accustom myself
to bear the cold air without needing this aid. And
though the winter weather prevailed and continually
increased in severity, even so I did not allow my
servants to heat the house, because I was afraid of
drawing out the dampness in the walls; but I
ordered them to carry in fire that had burned down
and to place in the room a very moderate number of
hot coals. But the coals, though there were not
very many of them, brought out from the walls
quantities of steam and this made me fall asleep.
And since my head was filled with the fumes I was
almost choked. Then I was carried outside, and
since the doctors advised me to throw up the food
I had just swallowed,&mdash;and it was little enough, by
Zeus&mdash;, I vomited it and at once became easier, so
that I had a more comfortable night, and next day
could do whatever I pleased.)
</p>

<p>
Οὕτω μὲν οὖν ἐγὼ καὶ ἐν Κελτοῖς κατὰ τὸν
τοῦ Μενάνδρου Δύσκολον αὐτὸς ἐμαυτῷ πόνους
προσετίθην. ἀλλ᾽ ἡ Κελτῶν μὲν ταῦτα ῥᾷον
ἔφερεν ἀγροικία, πόλις δ᾽ εὐδαίμων καὶ μακαρία
καὶ πολυάνθρωπος εἰκότως ἄχθεται, [B] ἐν ᾗ πολλοὶ
μὲν ὀρχησταί, πολλοὶ δ᾽ αὐληταί, μῖμοι δὲ
πλείους τῶν πολιτῶν, αἰδὼς δ᾽ οὐκ ἔστιν ἀρχόντων.
ἐρυθριᾶν γὰρ πρέπει τοῖς ἀνάνδροις, ἐπεὶ
τοῖς γε ἀνδρείοις, ὥσπερ ὑμεῖς, ἕωθεν κωμάζειν,
νύκτωρ ἡδυπαθεῖν, ὅτι τῶν νόμων ὑπερορᾶτε μὴ
<pb n='434'/><anchor id='Pg434'/><anchor id='Pg435'/>
λόγῳ διδάσκειν, ἀλλὰ τοῖς ἔργοις ἐνδείκνυσθαι.
καὶ γὰρ οἱ νόμοι φοβεροὶ διὰ τοὺς ἄρχοντας·
ὥστε ὅστις ἄρχοντα ὕβρισεν οὗτος ἐκ περιουσίας
τοὺς νόμους κατεπάτησεν· [C] ὡς δ᾽ ἐπὶ τούτοις
εὐφραινόμενοι δῆλον ποιεῖτε πολλαχοῦ μέν, οὐχ
ἥκιστα δ᾽ ἐν ταῖς ἀγοραῖς καὶ ἐν τοῖς θεάτροις,
ἀπὸ μὲν τῶν κρότων καὶ ἀπὸ τῆς βοῆς ὁ δῆμος,
οἱ δ᾽ ἐν τέλει τῷ γνωριμώτεροι μᾶλλον εἶναι καὶ
ὀνομάζεσθαι παρὰ πᾶσιν ἀφ᾽ ὧν εἰς τὰς τοιαύτας
ἑορτὰς ἐδαπάνησαν ἢ Σόλων ὁ Ἀθηναῖος ἀπὸ
τῆς πρὸς Κροῖσον τὸν Λυδῶν βασιλέα συνουσίας.
καλοὶ δὲ πάντες καὶ μεγάλοι καὶ λεῖοι καὶ
ἀγένειοι, [D] νέοι τε ὁμοίως καὶ πρεσβύτεροι ζηλωταὶ
τῆς εὐδαιμονίας τῶν Φαιάκων,
</p>

<p>
(After this fashion then, even when I was among
the Celts, like the ill-tempered man in Menander,<note place='foot'>cf. <hi rend='italic'>Oration</hi> 3. 113 <hi rend='smallcaps'>c</hi>, note. Cobet thinks that the verse
in Menander, <hi rend='italic'>Duskolos</hi> was αὐτὸς δ᾽ ἐμαυτῷ προστίθημι τοὺς
πόνους.</note>
<q>I myself kept heaping troubles on my own head.</q>
But whereas the boorish Celts used easily to put up
with these ways of mine, they are naturally resented
by a prosperous and gay and crowded city in which
there are numerous dancers and flute players and
more mimes than ordinary citizens, and no respect
at all for those who govern. For the blush of
modesty befits the unmanly, but manly fellows like
you it befits to begin your revels at dawn, to spend
your nights in pleasure, and to show not only by
your words but by your deeds also that you despise
the laws. For indeed it is only by means of those
in authority that the laws inspire fear in men; so
that he who insults one who is in authority, over
and above this tramples on the laws. And that you
take pleasure in this sort of behaviour you show
clearly on many occasions, but especially in the
market-places and theatres; the mass of the people
by their clapping and shouting, while those in office
show it by the fact that, on account of the sums
they have spent on such entertainments, they are
more widely known and more talked about by all
men than Solon the Athenian ever was on account of
his interview with Croesus the king of the Lydians.<note place='foot'>For Solon's visit to Croesus at Sardis cf. Herodotus 1. 29.</note>
And all of you are handsome and tall and smooth-skinned
and beardless; for young and old alike you
are emulous of the happiness of the Phaeacians, and
rather than righteousness you prefer)
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<lg>
<l>Εἵματα τ᾽ ἐξημοιβὰ λοετρά τε θερμὰ καὶ εὐνὰς</l>
</lg>

<p>
(<q>changes of
raiment and warm baths and beds.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Odyssey</hi> 8. 249.</note>)
</p>

</quote>

<p>
ἀντὶ τῆς ὁσίας ἀποδεχόμενοι.
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Τὴν δὴ σὴν ἀγροικίαν καὶ ἀπανθρωπίαν καὶ
σκαιότητα τούτοις ἁρμόσειν ὑπέλαβες; οὕτως
ἀνόητόν ἐστί σοι καὶ φαῦλον, ὦ πάντων ἀνθρώπων
ἀμαθέστατε καὶ φιλαπεχθημονέστατε,
τὸ λεγόμενον ὑπὸ τῶν ἀγεννεστάτων σῶφρον
τουτὶ ψυχάριον, ὃ δὴ σὐ κοσμεῖν καὶ καλλωπίζειν
σωφροσύνῃ χρῆναι νομίζεις; οὐκ ὀρθῶς, ὅτι πρῶτον
μὲν ἡ σωφροσύνη ὅ,τι [343] ποτ᾽ ἔστιν οὐκ ἴσμεν,
ὄνομα δ᾽ αὐτῆς ἀκούοντες μόνον ἔργον οὐχ ὁρῶμεν.
εἰ δ᾽ ὁποῖον σὺ νῦν ἐπιτηδεύεις ἐστίν, ἐπίστασθαι
μὲν ὅτι θεοῖς χρὴ δουλεύειν καὶ νόμοις, ἐκ τῶν
<pb n='436'/><anchor id='Pg436'/><anchor id='Pg437'/>
ἴσων δὲ τοῖς ὁμοτίμοις προσφέρεσθαι, καὶ τὴν ἐν
τούτοις ὑπεροχὴν φέρειν πρᾳότερον, ἐπιμελεῖσθαι
καὶ προνοεῖν, ὅπως οἱ πένητες ὑπὸ τῶν πλουτούντων
ἥκιστα ἀδικήσονται, καὶ ὑπὲρ τούτου
πράγματα ἔχειν, ὁποῖα εἰκός ἐστί σοι γενέσθαι
πολλάκις, ἀπεχθείας, ὀργάς, [B] λοιδορίας· εἶτα καὶ
ταῦτα φέρειν ἐγκρατῶς καὶ μὴ χαλεπαίνειν μηδ᾽
ἐπιτρέπειν τῷ θυμῷ, παιδαγωγεῖν δὲ αὑτόν, ὡς
ἐνδέχεται, καὶ σωφρονίζειν· εἰ δὲ καὶ τοῦτό τις
ἔργον θεῖτο σωφροσύνης, ἀπέχεσθαι πάσης ἡδονῆς
οὐ λίαν ἀπρεποῦς οὐδ᾽ ἐπονειδίστου δοκούσης ἐν
τῷ φανερῷ, πεπεισμένος ὡς οὐκ ἔστιν ἰδίᾳ σωφρονεῖν
[C] καὶ λάθρᾳ τὸν δημοσίᾳ καὶ φανερῷς
ἀκόλαστον εἶναι θέλοντα καὶ τερπόμενον τοῖς
θεάτροις· εἰ δὴ οὖν ὄντως ἡ σωφροσύνη τοιοῦτόν
ἐστιν, ἀπόλωλας μὲν αὐτός, ἀπολλύεις δὲ ἡμᾶς
οὐκ ἀνεχομένους ἀκούειν πρῶτον ὄνομα δουλείας
οὔτε πρὸς θεοὺς οὔτε πρὸς νόμους· ἡδὺ γὰρ ἐν
πᾶσι τὸ ἐλεύθερον.</q>
</p>

<p>
(<q>What then?</q> you answer, <q rend='pre'>did you really
suppose that your boorish manners and savage ways
and clumsiness would harmonise with these things?
O most ignorant and most quarrelsome of men, is it so
senseless then and so stupid, that puny soul of yours
which men of poor spirit call temperate, and which
you forsooth think it your duty to adorn and deck
out with temperance? You are wrong; for in the
first place we do not know what temperance is and
we hear its name only, while the real thing we
cannot see. But if it is the sort of thing that you
now practise, if it consists in knowing that men must
be enslaved to the gods and the laws, in behaving
with fairness to those of equal rank and bearing
with mildness any superiority among them; in
studying and taking thought that the poor may
suffer no injustice whatever at the hands of the rich;
and to attain this, in putting up with all the annoyances
that you will naturally often meet with, hatred,
anger, and abuse; and then in bearing these also
with firmness and not resenting them or giving way
to your anger, but in training yourself as far as possible
to practise temperance; and if again this also one
defines as the effect of temperance that one abstains
from every pleasure even though it be not excessively
unbecoming or considered blameworthy when openly
pursued, because you are convinced that it is impossible
for a man to be temperate in his private life
and in secret, if in public and openly he is willing to
be licentious and delights in the theatres; if, in
short, temperance is really this sort of thing, then
you yourself have ruined yourself and moreover you
are ruining us, who cannot bear in the first place
even to hear the name of slavery, whether it be
slavery to the gods or the laws. For sweet is liberty
in all things!</q>)
</p>

<p>
<q>Ἡ δὲ εἰρωνεία πόση; δεσπότης εἶναι οὐ φὴς
οὐδὲ ἀνέχῃ τοῦτο ἀκούων, ἀλλὰ καὶ ἀγανακτεῖς,
[D] ὥστε ἤδη ἔπεισας τοὺς πλείστους ἐθάδας πάλαι
γενομένους ἀφελεῖν ὡς ἐπίφθονον τῆς ἀρχῆς τοῦτο
τὸ ὄνομα, δουλεύειν δ᾽ ἡμᾶς ἀναγκάζεις ἄρχουσι
καὶ νόμοις. καίτοι πόσῳ κρεῖττον ἦν ὀνομάζεσθαι
μέν σε δεσπότην, ἔργῳ δὲ ἐᾶν ἡμᾶς εἶναι ἐλευθέρους,
ὦ τὰ μὲν ὀνόματα πρᾳότατε, πικρότατε
<pb n='438'/><anchor id='Pg438'/><anchor id='Pg439'/>
δὲ τὰ ἔργα; [344] πρὸς δὲ τούτοις ἀποκναίεις βιαζόμενος
μὲν τοὺς πλουσίους ἐν δικαστηρίοις μετριάζειν,
τοὺς πένητας δὲ εἴργεις συκοφαντεῖν. ἀφεὶς
δὲ τὴν σκηνὴν καὶ τοὺς μίμους καὶ τοὺς ὀρχηστὰς
ἀπολώλεκας ἡμῶν τὴν πόλιν, ὥστε οὐδὲν ἡμῖν
ἀγαθὸν ὑπάρχει παρὰ σοῦ πλὴν τῆς βαρύτητος,
ἧς ἀνεχόμενοι μῆνα ἕβδομον τουτονὶ τὸ μὲν εὔχεσθαι
πάντως ἀπαλλαγῆναι τοῦ τοσούτου κακοῦ
τοῖς περὶ τοὺς τάφους καλινδουμένοις γρᾳδίοις
ξυνεχωρήσαμεν, ἡμεῖς δὲ αὐτὸ διὰ τῆς ἡμῶν αὐτῶν
εὐτραπελίας [B] ἐξειργασάμεθα βάλλοντές σε τοῖς
σκώμμασιν ὥσπερ τοξεύμασι. σὺ δέ, ὦ γενναῖε,
πῶς ἀνέξῃ τὰ Περσῶν βέλη, τὰ ἡμέτερα τρέσας
σκώμματα;</q>
</p>

<p>
(<q>But what an affectation of humility is yours!
You say that you are not our master and you will not
let yourself be so called, nay more, you resent the
idea, so that you have actually persuaded the majority
of men who have long grown accustomed to it, to
get rid of this word <q>Government</q> as though it
were something invidious; and yet you compel us to
be enslaved to magistrates and laws. But how much
better it would be for you to accept the name of
master, but in actual fact to allow us to be free, you
who are so very mild about the names we use and so
very strict about the things we do! Then again you
harass us by forcing the rich to behave with moderation
in the lawcourts, though you keep the poor from
making money by informing.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> bringing false accusations, which was the trade of
the sycophant or blackmailer.</note> And by ignoring the
stage and mimes and dancers you have ruined our
city, so that we get no good out of you except your
harshness; and this we have had to put up with
these seven months, so that we have left it to the old
crones who grovel among the tombs to pray that we
may be entirely rid of so great a curse, but we ourselves
have accomplished it by our own ingenious
insolence, by shooting our satires at you like arrows.
How, noble sir, will you face the darts of Persians,
when you take flight at our ridicule?</q>)
</p>

<p>
Ἰδού, βούλομαι πάλιν ἀπ᾽ ἄλλης ἀρχῆς ἐμαυτῷ
λοιδορήσασθαι. <q rend='pre'>Φοιτᾷς εἰς τὰ ἱερά, δύσκολε καὶ
δύστροπε καὶ πάντα μοχθηρέ. συρρεῖ διὰ σὲ τὰ
πλήθη πρὸς τὰ τεμένη καὶ μέντοι καὶ οἱ πλείους
τῶν ἐν τέλει, καὶ ἀποδέχονταί σε σὺν βοῇ μετὰ
κρότων λαμπρῶς ἐν τοῖς τεμένεσιν ὥσπερ ἐν τοῖς
θεάτροις. [C] τί οὖν οὐκ ἀγαπᾷς οὐδ᾽ ἐπαινεῖς, ἀλλ᾽
ἐπιχειρεῖς εἶναι σοφώτερος τὰ τοιαῦτα τοῦ Πυθίου,
καὶ δημηγορεῖς ἐν τῷ πλήθει, καὶ καθάπτῃ
τῶν βοώντων πικρῶς αὐτὸ δὴ τοῦτο λέγων, ὡς
Ὑμεῖς τῶν θεῶν ἕνεκεν ὀλιγάκις εἰς τὰ τεμένη
συνέρχεσθε, συνδραμόντες δὲ δι᾽ ἐμὲ πολλῆς
ἀκοσμίας ἀναπίμπλατε τὰ ἱερά. [D] πρέπει δ᾽ ἀνδράσι
σώφροσι κεκοσμημένως εὔχεσθαι σιγῇ
<pb n='440'/><anchor id='Pg440'/><anchor id='Pg441'/>
παρὰ τῶν θεῶν αἰτουμένοις τὰ ἀγαθά. τοῦτον
οὐκ ἠκροᾶσθε τὸν νόμον Ὁμήρου</q>
</p>

<p>
(Come, I am ready to make a fresh start in abusing
myself. <q rend='pre'>You, sir, go regularly to the temples, ill-tempered,
perverse and wholly worthless as you are!
It is your doing that the masses stream into the
sacred precincts, yes and most of the magistrates as
well, and they give you a splendid welcome, greeting
you with shouts and clapping in the precincts as
though they were in the theatres. Then why do
you not treat them kindly and praise them? Instead
of that you try to be wiser in such matters than the
Pythian god,<note place='foot'>Apollo who was worshipped at Daphne near Antioch.</note> and you make harangues to the crowd
and with harsh words rebuke those who shout.
These are the very words you use to them: <q rend='pre'>You hardly
ever assemble at the shrines to do honour to
the gods, but to do me honour you rush here in
crowds and fill the temples with much disorder.
Yet it becomes prudent men to pray in orderly
fashion, and to ask blessings from the gods in silence.
Have you never heard Homer's maxim,)</q></q>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<lg>
<l>Σιγῇ ἐφ᾽ ὑμείων&mdash;,</l>
</lg>

<p>
(<q>In silence,
to yourselves</q><note place='foot'><p><hi rend='italic'>Iliad</hi> 7. 195
</p>
<p>
τόφρ᾽ ὑμεῖς εὔχεσθε Διί Κρονίωνι, ἄνακτι
σιγῇ ἐφ᾽ ὑμείων, ἵνα μὴ Τρῶές γε πύθωνται.</p></note>&mdash;,)
</p>

</quote>

<p>
οὐδ᾽ ὡς Ὀδυσσεὺς ἐπέσχε τὴν Εὐρύκλειαν ἐκπεπληγμένην
ὑπὸ μεγέθους τοῦ κατορθώματος,
</p>

<p>
(or how Odysseus checked Eurycleia
when she was stricken with amazement by
the greatness of his success,)
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<lg>
<l>Ἐν θυμῷ, γρηῦ, χαῖρε καὶ ἴσχεο μηδ᾽ ὀλόλυζε;</l>
</lg>

<p>
(<q>Rejoice, old woman, in
thy heart, and restrain thyself, and utter no loud
cry</q>?<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Odyssey</hi> 22. 411.</note>)
</p>

</quote>

<p>
<q rend='post'>τὰς δὲ δὴ Τρῳάδας οὔτι πρὸς τὸν Πρίαμον ἤ τινα
τῶν τούτου θυγατέρων ἢ υἱέων, οὐ μὴν οὐδ᾽ αὐτὸν
τὸν Ἔκτορα· [345] καίτοι τούτῳ φησὶν ὡς θεῷ τοὺς
Τρῶας εὔχεσθαι· εὐχομένας δὲ οὐκ ἔδειξεν ἐν τῇ
ποιήσει οὔτε γυναῖκας οὔτε ἄνδρας, ἀλλὰ τῇ
Ἀθηνᾷ ὀλολυγῇ πᾶσαι, φησί, χεῖρας ἀνέσχον,
βαρβαρικὸν μὲν καὶ τοῦτο καὶ γυναιξὶ πρέπον,
οὐ μὴν ἀνόσιον πρὸς τοὺς θεοὺς ὥσπερ τὸ παρ᾽
ὑμῶν ποιούμενον. ἐπαινεῖτε γὰρ ἀντὶ τῶν θεῶν
τοὺς ἀνθρώπους, [B] μᾶλλον δὲ ἀντὶ τῶν θεῶν τοὺς
ἀνθρώπους ἡμᾶς κολακεύετε. κάλλιστον δ᾽ ἔστιν
οἶμαι μηδ᾽ ἐκείνους κολακεύειν, ἀλλὰ θεραπεύειν
σωφρόνως.</q>
</p>

<p>
(<q><q>And again, Homer did not show us the
Trojan women praying to Priam or to any one of his
daughters or sons, nay not even to Hector himself
(though he does indeed say that the men of Troy
were wont to pray to Hector as to a god); but in his
poems he did not show us either women or men in
the act of prayer to him, but he says that to Athene
all the women lifted up their hands with a loud cry,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Iliad</hi> 6. 301.</note>
which was in itself a barbaric thing to do and suitable
only for women, but at any rate it displayed no
impiety to the gods as does your conduct. For you
applaud men instead of the gods, or rather instead
of the gods you flatter me who am a mere man. But
it would be best, I think, not to flatter even the
gods but to worship them with temperate hearts.</q></q>)
</p>

<p>
Ἰδού, πάλιν ἐγὼ τὰ συνήθη τεχνιτεύω λεξείδια
καὶ οὐδ᾽ ἐμαυτῷ συγχωρῶ φθέγγεσθαι ὡς ἔτυχεν
ἀδεῶς καὶ ἐλευθέρως, ἀλλὰ ὑπὸ τῆς συνήθους
σκαιότητος καὶ ἐμαυτὸν συκοφαντῶ. ταῦτά τις
καὶ τοιαῦτ᾽ ἂν λέγοι πρὸς ἄνδρας οὐ τὰ πρὸς
τοὺς ἄρχοντας μόνον, [C] ἀλλὰ καὶ τὰ πρὸς τοὺς
θεοὺς ἐλευθέρους εἶναι θέλοντας, ὅπως τις εὔνους
<pb n='442'/><anchor id='Pg442'/><anchor id='Pg443'/>
αὐτοῖς ὥσπερ πατὴρ ἤπιος νομισθείη, φύσει
πονηρὸς ὢν ὥσπερ ἐγώ. ἀνέχου τοίνυν αὐτῶν
μισούντων καὶ λοιδορούντων λάθρᾳ ἢ καὶ φανερῶς,
ἐπειδὴ κολακεύειν ἐνόμισας τοὺς ἐν τοῖς
ἱεροῖς ὁρμῇ μιᾷ<note place='foot'>ὁρμῇ μιᾷ Naber, ὁρώμενόν Hertlein, MSS.</note> σε ἐπαινοῦντας. οὐ γὰρ οἶμαι
διενοήθης ὅπως ἁρμόσει τῶν ἀνδρῶν οὔτε τοῖς
ἐπιτηδεύμασιν οὔτε τοῖς βίοις οὔτε τοῖς ἤθεσιν.
εἶεν. ἀλλ᾽ ἐκεῖνο τίς ἀνέξεταί σου; καθεύδεις
ὡς ἐπίπαν νύκτωρ μόνος οὐδ᾽ ἔστιν οὐδέν, [D] ὅ σου
τὸν ἄγριον καὶ ἀνήμερον μαλάξει θυμόν· ἀποκέκλεισται
δὲ πάσῃ πανταχοῦ πάροδος γλυκυθυμίᾳ·
καὶ τὸ μέγιστον τῶν κακῶν, ὅτι τοιοῦτον ζῶν
βίον εὐφραίνῃ καὶ πεποίησαι τὰς κοινὰς κατάρας
ἡδονήν. εἶτα ἀγανακτεῖς, εἴ του τὰ τοιαῦτα
ἀκοίεις; ἐξὸν εἰδέναι χάριν τοῖς ὑπ᾽ εὐνοίας ἐμμελέστερόν
σε νουθετοῦσιν ἐν τοῖς ἀναπαίστοις
ἀποψιλῶσαι μὲν τὰς παρειάς, καλὰ δὲ ἀπὸ
σαυτοῦ πρῶτον ἀρξάμενον δεικνύειν πάντα τῷ
δήμῳ τῷ φιλογέλωτι τῷδε θεάματα, [346] μίμους,
ὀρχηστάς, ἥκιστα αἰσχυνομένας γυναῖκας, παιδάρια
περὶ κάλλους ἁμιλλώμενα ταῖς γυναιξίν,
ἄνδρας ἀπεψιλωμένους οὔτι τὰς γνάθους μόνον,
ἀλλὰ καὶ ἅπαν τὸ σῶμα, λειότεροι τῶν γυναικῶν
ὅπως φαίνοιντο τοῖς ἐντυγχάνουσιν, ἑορτάς, πανηγύρεις,
οὔτι μὰ Δία τὰς ἱεράς, ἐν αἷς χρὴ σωφρονεῖν·
ἅλις μὲν γὰρ ἐκείνων ἐστίν, ὥσπερ τῆς
<pb n='444'/><anchor id='Pg444'/><anchor id='Pg445'/>
δρυός, [B] καὶ πολὺς ὁ κόρος αὐτῶν. ἔθυσεν ὁ καῖσαρ
ἐν τῷ τοῦ Διὸς ἅπαξ, εἶτα ἐν τῷ τῆς Τύχης, εἰς
τὸ τῆς Δήμητρος τρὶς ἐφεξῆς ἐβάδισεν· ἐπιλέλησμαι
γὰρ εἰς τὸ τῆς Δάφνης ὁσάκις εἰσῆλθον
πέμενος, προδοθὲν μὲν ὀλιγωρίᾳ τῶν φυλάκων,
ταῖς δὲ τῶν ἀθέων ἀνδρῶν τόλμαις ἀφανισθέν. ἡ
Σύρων ἥκει νουμηνία, καὶ ὁ καῖσαρ αὖθις εἰς
Φιλίου Διός· εἶτα ἡ πάγκοινος ἑορτή, καὶ ὁ
καῖσαρ εἰς τὸ τῆς [C] Τύχης ἔρχεται τέμενοσ. ἐπισχὼν
δὲ τὴν ἀποφράδα πάλιν ἐς Φιλίου Διὸς τὰς
εὐχὰς ἀναλαμβάνει κατὰ τὰ πάτρια. καὶ τίς
ἀνέξεται τοσαυτάκις εἰς ἱερὰ φοιτῶντος καίσαρος,
ἐξὸν ἅπαξ ἢ δὶς ἐνοχλεῖν τοῖς θεοῖς, ἐπιτελεῖν δὲ
τὰς πανηγύρεις ἐκείνας, ὁπόσαι κοιναὶ μέν εἰσι
παντὶ τῷ δήμῳ καὶ ὧν ἔξεστι μετέχειν οὐ τοῖς
ἐπισταμένοις μόνον θεούς,<note place='foot'>μόνον θεούς Hertlein suggests, θεούς MSS.</note> ἀλλὰ καὶ τοῖς ὦν<note place='foot'>τοῖς ὧν Naber, ὧν Hertlein, MSS.</note>
ἐστιν ἡ πόλις πλήρης; ἡδονὴ δὲ πολλὴ καὶ
χάριτες, ὁποίας ἄν τις εὐφραίνοιτο διηνεκῶς
καρπούμενος, [D] ὁρῶν ὀρχουμένους ἄνδρας καὶ παιδάρια
καὶ γύναια πολλά.
</p>

<p>
(See there I am again, busy with my usual
phrase-making! I do not even allow myself to speak
out at random fearlessly and freely, but with my
usual awkwardness I am laying information against
myself. It is thus and in words like these that
one ought to address men who want to be free
not only with respect to those who govern them
but to the gods also, in order that one may be
considered well-disposed towards them, <q>like an
indulgent father,</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Odyssey</hi> 5. 12.</note> even though one is by nature
an ill-conditioned person like myself: <q>Bear with
them then, when they hate and abuse you in secret
or even openly, since you thought that those who
applauded you with one accord in the temples were
only flattering you. For surely you did not suppose
that you would be in harmony with the pursuits
or the lives or the temperaments of these men. I
grant that. But who will bear with this other habit
of yours? You always sleep alone at night, and there
is no way of softening your savage and uncivilised
temper&mdash;since all avenues are closed to anything that
might sweeten your disposition,&mdash;and the worst of all
these evils is that you delight in living that sort of
life and have laid pleasure under a general ban. Then
can you feel aggrieved if you hear yourself spoken
of in such terms? No, you ought to feel grateful
to those who out of kindness of heart admonish
you wittily in anapaestic verse to shave your cheeks
smooth, and then, beginning with yourself, first
to show to this laughter-loving people all sorts
of fine spectacles, mimes, dancers, shameless women,
boys who in their beauty emulate women, and
men who have not only their jaws shaved smooth
but their whole bodies too, so that those who meet
them may think them smoother than women; yes
and feasts too and general festivals, not, by Zeus,
the sacred ones at which one is bound to behave
with sobriety. No, we have had enough of those,
like the oak tree in the proverb;<note place='foot'>The phrase δρῦς καὶ πέτρα, literally, <q>the oak tree and
the rock</q> became a proverb for something hackneyed; cf.
Hesiod, <hi rend='italic'>Theogony</hi> 35, ἀλλὰ τίη μοι ταῦτα περὶ δρῦν ἢ περὶ
πέτρην;</note> we are completely
surfeited with them. The Emperor sacrificed once
in the temple of Zeus, then in the temple of
Fortune; he visited the temple of Demeter three
times in succession.</q> (I have in fact forgotten
how many times I entered the shrine of Daphne,
which had been first abandoned owing to the
carelessness of its guardians, and then destroyed
by the audacious acts of godless men.<note place='foot'>The Christians invaded the shrine of Apollo at Daphne
and the priests of Apollo abandoned it to them. Julian
destroyed the Christian Church there and restored the worship
of Apollo.</note>) <q>The
Syrian New Year arrived, and again the Emperor
went to the temple of Zeus the Friendly One.
Then came the general festival, and the Emperor
went to the shrine of Fortune. Then, after refraining
on the forbidden day,<note place='foot'>Literally the <q>day not to be mentioned,</q> <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> <q>unholy
day,</q> <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>nefastus dies</foreign>, on which business was suspended.</note> again he goes to the temple
of Zeus the Friendly One, and offers up prayers
according to the custom of our ancestors. Now
who could put up with an Emperor who goes
to the temples so often, when it is in his power
to disturb the gods only once or twice, and to
celebrate the general festivals which are for all
the people in common, those in which not only
men whose profession it is to have knowledge of
the gods can take part, but also the people who
have crowded into the city? For pleasure is here
in abundance, and delights whose fruits one could
enjoy continuously; for instance the sight of men
and pretty boys dancing, and any number of
charming women.</q>)
</p>

<p>
Ὅταν οὖν ταῦτα λογίσωμαι, μακαρίζω μὲν
ὑμᾶς τῆς εὐδαιμονίας, ἐμαυτῷ δὲ οὐκ ἄχθομαι·
<pb n='446'/><anchor id='Pg446'/><anchor id='Pg447'/>
φίλα γάρ ἐστί μοι κατά τινα θεὸν ἴσως ταῦτα.
διόπερ οὐδ᾽ ἀγανακτῶ, εὖ ἴστε, τοῖς δυσχεραίνουσί
μου τῷ βίῳ καὶ τῇ προαιρέσει. προστίθημι δ᾽
αὐτὸς ὅσα δυνατόν ἐστί μοι τοῖς εἰς ἐμαυτὸν
σκώμμασι μειζόνως ἐπικαταχέων ἐμαυτοῦ ταυτασὶ
τὰς λοιδορίας, [347] ὃς ὑπὸ ἀφροσύνης οὐ συνὴκα,
ποταπὸν ἐξ ἀρχῆς τὸ τῆσδε τῆς πόλεως ἦθος,
καὶ ταῦτα τῶν ἡλικιωτῶν τῶν ἐμῶν, ὡς ἐμαυτὸν
πείθω, βιβλία ἀνελίξας οὐδενὸς ἀριθμὸν ἐλάττω.
λέγεταί τοί ποτε τὸν ἐπώνυμον τῆσδε τῆς πόλεως
βασιλέα, μᾶλλον δὲ οὗπερ ἐπώνυμος ἥδε ἡ πόλις
συνῳκίσθη· πεπόλισται<note place='foot'>πεπόλισται Cobet, Hertlein approves, πεποίητα</note> μὲν γὰρ ὑπὸ Σελεύκου,
τοὔνομα δὲ ἔχει ἀπὸ τοῦ Σελεύκου παιδός· ὃν δή
φασι δι᾽ ὑπερβολὴν ἁβρότητος [B] καὶ τρυφῆς ἐρῶντα
ἀεὶ καὶ ἐρώμενον τέλος ἄδικον ἔρωτα τῆς ἑαυτοῦ
μητρυιᾶς ἐρασθῆναι· κρύπτειν δ᾽ ἐθέλοντα τὸ
πάθος οὐ δύνασθαι, τὸ σῶμα δ᾽ αὐτῷ κατὰ
μικρὸν τηκόμενον ἀφανῶς οἴχεσθαι, καὶ ὑπορρεῖν
τὰς δυνάμεις, καὶ τὸ πνεῦμα ἔλαττον εἶναι τοῦ
συνήθους. ἐῴκει δ᾽ οἶμαι τὰ<note place='foot'>τὰ Hertlein suggests, τὸ MSS.</note> κατ᾽ αὐτὸν αἰνίγματι,
σαφῆ μὲν οὐκ ἐχούσης αἰτίαν τῆς νόσου,
μᾶλλον δὲ οὐδ᾽ αὐτῆς, [C] ἥτις ποτέ ἐστι, φαινομένης,
ἐναργοῦς δ᾽ οὔσης τῆς περὶ τὸ μειράκιον ἀσθηνίεας.
ἐνθάδε μέγας ἆθλος ἰατρῷ προυτέθη τῷ
Σαμίῳ τὴν νόσον, ἥτις ποτέ ἐστιν, ἐξευρεῖν. ὁ
δὲ ὑπονοήσας ἐκ τῶν Ὁμήρου, τίνες ποτέ εἰσιν
<pb n='448'/><anchor id='Pg448'/><anchor id='Pg449'/>
αἱ γυιοβόροι μελεδῶναι, καὶ ὅτι πολλάκις οὐκ
ἀσθένεια σώματος, ἀλλ᾽ ἀρροστία ψυχῆς αἰτία
γίγνεται τηκεδόνος τῷ σώματι, καὶ τὸ μειράκιον
ὁρῶν ὑπό τε ἡλικίας καὶ συνηθείας οὐκ ἀναφρόδιτον,
ὁδὸν ἐτράπετο τοιαύτην ἐπὶ τὴν τοῦ νοσήματος
θήραν. [D] καθίζει πλησίον τῆς κλίνης ἀφορῶν
εἰς τὸ πρόσωπον τοῦ μειρακίου, παριέναι κελεύσας
καλούς τε καὶ καλὰς ἀπὸ τῆς βασιλίδος ἀρξαμένους.
ἡ δ᾽ ὡς ἦλθεν, ἐπισκεψομένη δῆθεν
αὐτόν, αὐτίκα ἐδίδου τὰ συνθήματα τοῦ πάθους
ὁ νεανίας, ἆσθμα τῶν θλιβομένον ἠφίει, ἐπέχειν
γὰρ αὐτὸ κινούμενον καίπερ σφόδρα ἐθέλων οὐχ
οἷός τε ἦν, καὶ ταραχὴ ἦν τοῦ πνεύματος καὶ
πολὺ περὶ τὸ πρόσωπον ἐρύθημα. [348] ταῦτα ὁρῶν
ὁ ἰατρὸς προσάγει τῷ στέρνῳ τὴν χεῖρα, καὶ
ἐπήδα δεινῶς ἡ καρδία καὶ ἔξω ἵετο. τοιαῦτα
ἄττα ἔπασχεν ἐκείνης παρούσης· ἐπεὶ δὲ ἀπῆλθεν,
ἐπιόντων ἄλλων, ἀτρέμας εἶχε καὶ ἦν ὅμοιος
τοῖς οὐδὲν πάσχουσι. συνιδὼν δὲ τὸ πάθος ὁ
Ἐρασίστρατος φράζει πρὸς τὸν βασιλέα, καὶ
ὃς ὑπὸ τοῦ φιλόπαις εἶναι παραχωρεῖν ἔφη τῷ
παιδὶ τῆς γαμετῆς. ὁ δὲ αὐτίκα μὲν ἠρνήσατο·
τελευτήσαντος δὲ τοῦ πατρὸς μικρὸν ὕστερον,
ἣν πρότερον διδομένην αὐτῷ χάριν εὐγενῶς
ἠρνήθη, μάλα κραταιῶς μετεδίωξεν.
</p>

<p>
(When I take all this into account, I do indeed
congratulate you on your good fortune, though I do
not reproach myself. For perhaps it is some god
who has made me prefer my own ways. Be assured
then that I have no grievance against those who
quarrel with my way of life and my choice. But
I myself add, as far as I can, to the sarcasms against
myself and with a more liberal hand I pour down on
my own head these abusive charges. For it was due
to my own folly that I did not understand what has
been the temper of this city from the beginning;
and that too though I am convinced that I have
turned over quite as many books as any man of my
own age. You know of course the tale that is told
about the king who gave his name to this city&mdash;or
rather whose name the city received when it was
colonised, for it was founded by Seleucus, though it
takes its name from the son<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> Antiochus.</note> of Seleucus&mdash;; they
say<note place='foot'>cf. Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Demetrius</hi>.</note> then that out of excessive softness and luxury
the latter was constantly falling in love and being
loved, and finally he conceived a dishonourable
passion for his own step-mother. And though he
wished to conceal his condition he could not, and
little by little his body began to waste away and to
become transparent, and his powers to wane, and his
breathing was feebler than usual. But what could
be the matter with him was, I think, a sort of riddle,
since his malady had no visible cause, or rather it
did not even appear what was its nature, though the
youth's weakness was manifest. Then the physician
of Samos<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> Erasistratus.</note> was set a difficult problem, namely to
discover what was the nature of the malady. Now
he, suspecting from the words of Homer<note place='foot'>The phrase occurs in Hesiod, <hi rend='italic'>Works and Days</hi> 66, but
not in Homer.</note> what is
the nature of <q>cares that devour the limbs,</q> and
that in many cases it is not a bodily weakness but
an infirmity of soul that causes a wasting of the
body; and seeing moreover that the youth was very
susceptible to love because of his time of life and his
habits, he took the following way of tracking down the
disease. He sat near the youth's couch and watched
his face, after ordering handsome youths and women
to walk past him, beginning with the queen<note place='foot'>Stratonice.</note>
herself. Now when she entered, apparently to see
how he was, the young man at once began to show
the symptoms of his malady. He breathed like one
who is being choked; for though he was very
anxious to control his agitated breathing, he could
not, but it became disordered, and a deep blush
spread over his face. The physician on seeing this
laid his hand to his breast, and found that his heart
was beating terribly fast and was trying to burst
forth from his breast. Such were his symptoms
while she was present; but when she had gone
away and others came in he remained calm and was
like a man in a normal state of health. Then
Erasistratus saw what ailed him and told the king,
and he out of love for his son said that he would give
up his wife to him. Now the youth for the moment
refused; but when his father died not long after, he
sought with the greatest vehemence the favour
which he had so honourably refused when it was
first offered to him.<note place='foot'>In Plutarch's version Antiochus married Stratonice during
his father's lifetime.</note>)
</p>

<p>
[B] Ἀντιόχῳ μὲν δὴ ταῦτα ἐποιήθη. τοῖς δ᾽ ἀπ᾽
ἐκείνου γενομένοις οὐ νέμεσις ζηλοῦν τὸν οἰκιστὴν
<pb n='450'/><anchor id='Pg450'/><anchor id='Pg451'/>
ἢ τὸν ἐπώνυμον.<note place='foot'>ἐπώνυμον Hertlein suggests, ὁμώνυμον MSS.</note> ὥσπερ γὰρ ἐν τοῖς φυτοῖς εἰκός
ἐστι διαδίδοσθαι μέχρι πολλοῦ τὰς ποιότητας,
ἴσως δὲ καὶ ἐπίπαν ὅμοια τὰ μετὰ ταῦτα τοῖς
ἐξ ὧν ἐβλάστησε φύεσθαι, οὕτω καὶ ἐπὶ τῶν
ἀνθρώπων εἶναι εἰκὸς παραπλήσια τὰ ἤθη τῶν
ἀπογόνων τοῖς προγόνοις. ἐγώ τοι καὶ αὐτὸς
ἔγνων Ἀθηναίους [C] Ἑλλήνων φιλοτιμοτάτους καὶ
φιλανθρωποτάτους· καίτοι τοῦτό γε ἐπιεικῶς ἐν
πᾶσιν εἶδον τοῖς Ἕλλησιν, ἔχω δ᾽ ὑπὲρ αὐτῶν
εἰπεῖν, ὡς καὶ φιλόθεοι μάλιστα πάντων εἰσὶ
καὶ δεξιοὶ τὰ πρὸς τοὺς ξένους, καθόλου μὲν
Ἕλληνες πάντες, αὐτῶν δ᾽ Ἑλλήνων πλέον
τοῦτο ἔχω μαρτυρεῖν Ἀθηναίοις. εἰ δὲ ἐκεῖνοι
διασώζουσιν εἰκόνα τῆς παλαιᾶς ἐν τοῖς ἤθεσιν
ἀρετῆς, εἰκὸς δήπουθεν τὸ αὐτὸ ὑπάρχειν καὶ
Σύροις καὶ Ἀραβίοις καὶ Κελτοῖς καὶ Θρᾳξὶ
καὶ Παίοσι καὶ τοῖς ἐν μέσῳ κειμένοις Θρᾳκῶν
[D] καὶ Παιόνων ἐπ᾽ αὐταῖς Ἴστρου ταῖς ᾐόσι
Μυσοῖς, ὅθεν δὴ καὶ τὸ γένος ἐστί μοι πᾶν
ἄγροικον, αὐστηρόν, ἀδέξιον, ἀναφρόδιτον, ἐμμένον
τοῖς κριθεῖσιν ἀμετακινήτως· ἃ δὴ πάντα
ἐστὶ δείγματα δεινῆς ἀγροικίας.
</p>

<p>
(Now since this was the conduct of Antiochus, I
have no right to be angry with his descendants when
they emulate their founder or him who gave his
name to the city. For just as in the case of plants
it is natural that their qualities should be transmitted
for a long time, or rather that, in general, the
succeeding generation should resemble its ancestors;
so too in the case of human beings it is natural
that the morals of descendants should resemble
those of their ancestors. I myself, for instance,
have found that the Athenians are the most
ambitious for honour and the most humane of
all the Greeks. And indeed I have observed that
these qualities exist in an admirable degree among
all the Greeks, and I can say for them that more
than all other nations they love the gods, and
are hospitable to strangers; I mean all the Greeks
generally, but among them the Athenians above
all as I can bear witness. And if they still preserve
in their characters the image of their ancient virtue,
surely it is natural that the same thing should
be true of the Syrians also, and the Arabs and
Celts and Thracians and Paeonians, and those who
dwell between the Thracians and Paeonians, I mean
the Mysians on the very banks of the Danube,
from whom my own family is derived, a stock
wholly boorish, austere, awkward, without charm
and abiding immovably by its decisions; all of which
qualities are proofs of terrible boorishness.)
</p>

<p>
Αἰτοῦμαι τοίνυν ὑπὲρ ἐμαυτοῦ πρῶτον συγγνώμην,
ἐν μέρει δὲ καὶ ὑμῖν νέμω τὰ πάτρια
ζηλοῦσιν, οὐδ᾽ ἐν ὀνείδει προφέρομαι τὸ
</p>

<p>
(I therefore ask for forgiveness, in the first place
for myself, and in my turn I grant it to you also
since you emulate the manners of your forefathers,
nor do I bring it against you as a reproach when
I say that you are)
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<lg>
<l>[349] Ψεῦσταί τ᾽ ὀρχησταί τε χοροιτυπίῃσιν ἄριστοι,</l>
</lg>

<p>
(<q>Liars and dancers, well skilled
to dance in a chorus</q>;<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Iliad</hi> 24. 261.</note>)
</p>

</quote>

<p>
τοὐναντίον δὲ ἀντ᾽ ἐγκωμίων ὑμῖν προσεῖναί
<pb n='452'/><anchor id='Pg452'/><anchor id='Pg453'/>
φημι πατρίων ζῆλον ἐπιτηδευμάτων. ἐπεὶ καὶ
Ὅμηρος ἐπαινῶν τὸν Αὐτόλυκόν φησι περιεῖναι
πάντων
</p>

<p>
(on the contrary it is in the
place of a panegyric that I ascribe to you emulation
of the practice of your forefathers. For Homer too
is praising Autolycus when he says that he
surpassed all men)
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<lg>
<l>Κλεπτοσύνῃ θ᾽ ὅρκῳ τε.</l>
</lg>

<p>
(<q>in stealing and perjury.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Odyssey</hi> 19. 396.</note>)
</p>

</quote>

<p>
καὶ ἐμαυτοῦ τὴν σκαιότητα καὶ τὴν ἀμαθίαν
καὶ τὴν δυσκολίαν [B] καὶ τὸ μὴ ῥᾳδίως μαλάττεσθαι
μηδὲ ἐπὶ τοῖς δεομένοις ἢ τοῖς ἐξαπατῶσι τὰ
ἐμαυτοῦ ποιεῖσθαι μηδὲ ταῖς βοαῖς εἴκειν καὶ
τὰ τοιαῦτα στέργω ὀνείδη. πότερα μὲν οὖν ἐστι
κουφότερα, θεοῖς ἴσως δῆλον, ἐπείπερ ἀνθρώπων
οὐδεὶς οἷός τε ἡμῖν ἐστιν ὑπὲρ τῶν διαφορῶν
βραβεῦσαι· πεισόμεθα γὰρ οὐδαμῶς αὐτῷ διὰ
φιλαυτίαν, θαυμάζειν γὰρ εἰκὸς τὰ ἑαυτοῦ ἕκαστον,
ἀτιμάζειν δὲ τὰ παρὰ τοῖς ἄλλοις. ὁ δὲ
τῷ τὰ ἐναντία ζηλοῦντι νέμων συγγνώμην εἶναί
μοι δοκεῖ πρᾳότατος.
</p>

<p>
(And as for my own awkwardness and ignorance
and ill-temper, and my inability to be influenced,
or to mind my own business when people beg me
to do so or try to deceive me and that I cannot yield
to their clamour&mdash;even such reproaches I gladly
accept. But whether your ways or mine are more
supportable is perhaps clear to the gods, for among
men there is no one capable of arbitrating in our
disagreement. For such is our self-love that we
shall never believe him, since everyone of us
naturally admires his own ways and despises those
of other men. In fact he who grants indulgence
to one whose aims are the opposite of his own is, in
my opinion, the most considerate of men.)
</p>

<p>
[C] Ἐγὼ δὲ ἐννοήσας εὑρίσκω καὶ ἕτερα δεινὰ
ἐμαυτὸν εἰργασμένον. πόλει γὰρ προσιὼν ἐλευθέρᾳ,
τὸν αὐχμὸν τῶν τριχῶν οὐκ ἀνεχομένῃ,
ὥσπερ οἱ κουρέων ἀποροῦντες ἄκαρτος καὶ βαθυγένειος
εἰσέδραμον· ἐνόμισας ἂν Σμικρίνην ὁρᾶν
ἢ Θρασυλέοντα, δύσκολον πρεσβύτην ἢ στρατιώτην
ἀνόητον, ἐξὸν φανῆναι τῷ καλλωπισμῷ παῖδα
ὡραῖον καὶ γενέσθαι μειράκιον, εἰ μὴ τὴν ἡλικίαν,
τὸν τρόπον γε [D] καὶ τὴν ἁβρότητα τοῦ προσώπου.
<q>Οὐκ οἶσθα ἀνθρώποις ὁμιλεῖν, οὐδ᾽ ἐπαινέτης
<pb n='454'/><anchor id='Pg454'/><anchor id='Pg455'/>
εἶ τοῦ Θεόγνιδος, οὐδὲ μιμῇ τὸν ἀφομοιούμενον
ταῖς πέτραις πολύπουν, ἀλλ᾽ ἡ λεγομένη Μυκόνιος
ἀγροικία τε καὶ ἀμαθία καὶ ἀβελτηρία
πρὸς πάντας ἐπιτηδεύεται παρὰ σοῦ. λέληθέ
σε ὅτι<note place='foot'>σε ὅτι&mdash;δεῖ Cobet, σε&mdash;δεῖν Hertlein, MSS.</note> πολλοῦ δεῖ ταῦτα εἶναι Κελτοὶ καὶ
Θρᾷκες καὶ Ἰλλυριοί; οὐχ ὁρᾷς, ὁπόσα μὲν
ἐν τῇ πόλει ταύτῃ καπηλεῖα; [350] σὺ δὲ ἀπεχθάνῃ
τοῖς καπήλοις οὐ ξυγχωρῶν ὁπόσου βούλονται
πωλεῖν αὐτοὺς<note place='foot'>αὐτοὺς Reiske, αὐτοῖς Hertlein, MSS.</note> τῷ δήμῳ τὰ ἐπιτήδεια καὶ τοῖς
ἐπιδημοῦσιν. οἱ δὲ τοὺς κεκτημένους τὴν γῆν
αἰτιῶνται. σὺ δὲ καὶ τούτους ἐχθροὺς ποιεῖ
σαυτῷ τὰ δίκαια ποιεῖν ἀναγκάζων. οἱ δὲ ἐν
τέλει τῆς πόλεως ἀμφοῖν μετέχοντες ταῖν ζημίαιν,
ὥσπερ οἶιμαι πρότερον ἔχαριρον διχόθεν
καρπούμενοι τὰς ὠφελείας, [B] καὶ ὡς κεκτημένοι
καὶ ὡς καπηλεύοντες, τὰ νῦν εἰκότως λυποῦνται
δι᾽ ἀμφοτέρων ἀφῃρημένοι τὰς ἐπικερδείας. ὁ
δὲ τῶν Σύρων δῆμος οὐκ ἔχων μεθύειν οὐδὲ
κορδακίζειν ἄχθεται. σὺ δὲ σῖτον ἄφθονον παρέχων
οἴει τρέφειν αὐτοὺς ἱκανῶς. ἐκεῖνο δέ σου
χαρίεν, ὅτι οὐδὲ ὅπως ἰχθὺς ἐν τῇ πόλει πετραῖος
ἔσται σκοπεῖς· ἀλλὰ καὶ πρῴην μεμφομένου
τινός, ὡς οὔτε ἰχθυδίων οὔτε ὀρνίθων πολλῶν
<pb n='456'/><anchor id='Pg456'/><anchor id='Pg457'/>
εὑρισκομένων ἐν ἀγορᾷ, [C] τωθαστικὸν μάλα ἐγέλασας,
ἄρτου καὶ οἴνου καὶ ἐλαίου τῇ σώφρονι
πόλει δεῖν φάμενος, κρεῶν δ᾽ ἤδη τῇ τρυφώσῃ·
τὸ γὰρ καὶ ἰχθύων καὶ ὀρνιθίων λόγον ποιεῖσθαι
πέρα τρυφῆς εἶναι καὶ ἧς οὐδὲ τοῖς ἐν Ἰθάκῃ
μνηστῆρσι μετῆν ἀσελγείας. ὅτῳ δὲ οὐκ ἐν
ἡδονῇ κρέα ὕεια καὶ προβάτεια σιτεῖσθαι, τῶν
ὀσπρίων ἁπτόμενος εὖ πράξει. ταῦτα ἐνόμισας
Θρᾳξὶ νομοθετεῖν [D] τοῖς σεαυτοῦ πολίταις ἢ τοῖς
ἀναισθήτοις Γαλάταις, οἵ σε ἐπαιδοτρίβησαν
καθ᾽ ἡμῶν <q>πρίνινον, σφενδάμνινον,</q> οὐκέτι
μέντοι καὶ <q>Μαραθωνομάχον,</q> ἀλλ᾽ Ἀχαρνέα
μὲν ἐξ ἡμισείας, ἀηδῆ δ᾽ ἄνδρα παντάπασι καὶ
ἄνθρωπον ἄχαριν. οὐ κρεῖττον ἦν ὀδωδέναι μύρων
τὴν ἀγορὰν βαδίζοντός σου καὶ παῖδας ἡγεῖσθαι
καλούς, εἰς οὓς ἀποβλέψουσιν οἱ πολῖται, καὶ
χοροὺς γυναικῶν, ὁποῖοι παρ᾽ ἡμῖν ἵστανται καθ᾽
ἑκάστην ἡμέραν;</q>
</p>

<p>
(But now I come to ponder the matter I find that I
have committed yet other terrible sins. For though
I was coming to a free city which cannot tolerate
unkempt hair, I entered it unshaven and with a long
beard, like men who are at a loss for a barber. One
would have thought it was some Smicrines<note place='foot'>Smicrines is a typical name in New Comedy for an
avaricious old man; Thrasyleon is said to have been used by
Menander as the name of a boasting soldier, <q>miles gloriosus.</q></note> he saw,
or some Thrasyleon, some ill-tempered old man or
crazy soldier, when by beautifying myself I might
have appeared as a blooming boy and transformed
myself into a youth, if not in years, at any rate in
manners and effeminacy of features. <q>You do not
know,</q> you answer, <q>how to mix with people, and
cannot approve of the maxim of Theognis,<note place='foot'>Theognis 215 foll. advises men to imitate the adaptability
of the polypus.</note> for
you do not imitate the polypus which takes on the
colours of the rocks. Nay rather you behave to all
men with the proverbial Myconian<note place='foot'>Mykonos was an island in the Cyclades whose inhabitants
were proverbial for poverty and greed.</note> boorishness and
ignorance and stupidity. Are you not aware that we
here are far from being Celts or Thracians or
Illyrians? Do you not see what a number of shops
there are in this city? But you are hated by the
shopkeepers because you do not allow them to sell
provisions to the common people and those who are
visiting the city at a price as high as they please.
The shopkeepers blame the landowners for the high
prices; but you make these men also your enemies,
by compelling them to do what is just. Again, those
who hold office in the city are subject to both
penalties; I mean that just as, before you came,
they obviously used to enjoy profits from both
sources, both as landowners and as shopkeepers, so
naturally they are now aggrieved on both accounts,
since they have been robbed of their profits from
both sources. Then the whole body of Syrian
citizens are discontented because they cannot get
drunk and dance the cordax.<note place='foot'>The cordax was a lascivious dance.</note> You, however, think
that you are feeding them well enough if you
provide them with plenty of corn. Another charming
thing about you is that you do not even take care
that the city shall have shell-fish. Nay more, when
someone complained the other day that neither
shell-fish nor much poultry could be found in the
market, you laughed very maliciously and said that a
well-conducted city needs bread, wine and olive oil,
but meat only when it is growing luxurious.<note place='foot'>Plato, <hi rend='italic'>Republic</hi> 372 <hi rend='smallcaps'>e</hi>.</note> For
you said that even to speak of fish and poultry is
the extreme of luxury and of profligacy such as was
beyond the reach of even the suitors in Ithaca; and
that anyone who did not enjoy eating pork and
mutton<note place='foot'>The suitors of Penelope lived on pork and mutton.</note> would fare very well if he took to
vegetables.<note place='foot'>Literally <q>pulse.</q></note> You must have thought that you were
laying down these rules for Thracians, your own
fellow-citizens, or for the uncultured people of
Gaul who&mdash;so much the worse for us!&mdash;trained you
to be <q>a heart of maple, a heart of oak,</q> though
not indeed <q>one who fought at Marathon</q><note place='foot'>Aristophanes, <hi rend='italic'>Acharnians</hi> 180 uses these words to describe
the older, more robust generation of Athenians.</note> also,
but rather to be half of you an Acharnian and
altogether an unpleasant person and an ungracious
fellow. Would it not be better that the market
place should be fragrant with myrrh when you walk
there and that you should be followed by a troop of
handsome boys at whom the citizens could stare, and
by choruses of women like those that exhibit themselves
every day in our city?</q>)
</p>

<p>
[351] Ἐμὲ δὲ ὑγρὸν βλέπειν ῥιπτοῦντα πανταχοῦ
τὰ ὄμματα, ὅπως ὑμῖν καλός, οὔτι τὴν ψυχήν,
ἀλλὰ τὸ πρόσωπον ὀφθείην, ὁ τρόπος οὐ συγχωρεῖ.
ἔστι γάρ, ὡς ὑμεῖς κρίνετε, ψυχῆς ἀληθινὸν
κάλλος ὑγρότης βίου. ἐμὲ δὲ ὁ παιδαγωγὸς ἐδίδασκεν
εἰς γῆν βλέπειν ἐς διδασκάλου φοιτῶντα·
θέατρον δ᾽ οὐκ εἶδον πρὶν μᾶλλον κομῆσαι τῆς
<pb n='458'/><anchor id='Pg458'/><anchor id='Pg459'/>
κεφαλῆς τὸ γένειον, ἐν ἐκείνῳ δὲ τῆς ἡλικίας ἰδίᾳ
μὲν καὶ κατ᾽ ἐμαυτὸν οὐδέποτε, τρίτον δὲ ἢ τέταρτον,
εὖ ἴστε, [B] Πατρόκλῳ ἐπίηρα φέρων ἄρχων
ἐπέταττεν οἰκεῖος ὢν ἐμοὶ καὶ ἀναγκαῖος· ἐτύγχανον
δὲ ἰδιώτης ἔτι· σύγγνωτε οὖν ἐμοί· δίδωμι
γὰρ ὃν ἀντ᾽ ἐμοῦ δικαιότερον μισήσετε τὸν φιλαπεχθήμονα
παιδαγωγόν, ὅς με καὶ τότε ἐλύπει
μίαν ὁδὸν ἰέναι διδάσκων καὶ νῦν αἴτιος ἐστί μοι
τῆς πρὸς ὑμᾶς ἀπεχθείας, [C] ἐνεργασάμενος τῇ ψυχῇ
καὶ ὥσπερ ἐντυπώσας ὅπερ ἐγὼ μὲν οὐκ ἐβουλόμην
τότε, ὁ δὲ ὡς δή τι χαρίεν ποιῶν μάλα
προθύμως ἐνετίθει, καλῶν οἶμαι σεμνότητα τὴν
ἀγροικίαν καὶ σωφροσύνην τὴν ἀναισθησίαν, ἀνδρείαν
δὲ τὸ μὴ εἴκειν ταῖς ἐπιθυμίαις μηδ᾽
εὐδαίμονα ταύτῃ γίνεσθαι. ἔφη δέ μοι πολλάκις,
εὖ ἴστε, ναὶ μὰ Δία καὶ μούσας, ὁ παιδαγωγὸς ἔτι
παιδαρίῳ κομιδῇ, Μή σε παραπειθέτω τὸ πλῆθος
τῶν ἡλικιωτῶν ἐπὶ τὰ θέατρα [D] φερόμενον ὀρεχθῆναί
ποτε ταυτησὶ τῆς θέας. ἱπποδρομίας ἐπιθυμεῖς;
ἔστι παρ᾽ Ὁμήρῳ δεξιώτατα πεποιημένη· λαβὼν
ἐπέξιθι τὸ βιβλίον. τοὺς παντομίμους ἀκούεις
ὀρχηστάς; ἔα χαίρειν αὐτούς· ἀνδρικώτερον παρὰ
τοῖς Φαίαξιν ὀρχεῖται τὰ μειράκια· σὺ δ᾽ ἔχεις
κιθαρῳδὸν τὸν Φήμιον καὶ ᾠδὸν τὸν Δημόδοκον.
<pb n='460'/><anchor id='Pg460'/><anchor id='Pg461'/>
ἔστι καὶ φυτὰ παρ᾽ αὐτῷ πολλὰ τερπνότερα
ἀκοῦσαι τῶν ὁρωμένων·
</p>

<p>
(No, my temperament does not allow me to look
wanton, casting my eyes in all directions in order
that in your sight I may appear beautiful, not indeed
in soul but in face. For, in your judgment, true
beauty of soul consists in a wanton life. I, however,
was taught by my tutor to look on the ground when
I was on my way to school; and as for a theatre,
I never saw one until I had more hair on my chin
than on my head,<note place='foot'>Xenophon, <hi rend='italic'>Symposium</hi> 4. 28.</note> and even at that age it was never
on my own account and by my own wish, but three
or four times, you must know, the governor who was
my kinsman and near relative, <q>doing a favour
to Patroclus,</q> ordered me to attend; it was
while I was still a private individual.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> before he had been appointed Caesar.</note> Therefore
forgive me. For I hand over to you instead of
myself one whom you will more justly detest, I
mean that curmudgeon my tutor who even then used
to harass me by teaching me to walk in one straight
path<note place='foot'>cf. 352 <hi rend='smallcaps'>c</hi>.</note> and now he is responsible for my quarrel with
you. It was he who wrought in my soul and as it
were carved therein what I did not then desire,
though he was very zealous in implanting it, as
though he were producing some charming characteristic;
and boorishness he called dignity, lack of
taste he called sobriety, and not yielding to one's
desires or achieving happiness by that means he
called manliness. I assure you, by Zeus and the
Muses, that while I was still a mere boy my tutor
would often say to me: <q rend='pre'>Never let the crowd of
your playmates who flock to the theatres lead you
into the mistake of craving for such spectacles
as these. Have you a passion for horse races?
There is one in Homer,<note place='foot'>The chariot race in <hi rend='italic'>Iliad</hi> 23.</note> very cleverly described.
Take the book and study it. Do you hear them
talking about dancers in pantomime? Leave them
alone! Among the Phaeacians the youths dance
in more manly fashion. And for citharode<note place='foot'>The citharode played and sang to the lyre: Phemius was
at the court of Odysseus in Ithaca; Demodocus in Phaeacia.</note> you
have Phemius; for singer Demodocus. Moreover
there are in Homer many plants more delightful to
hear of than those that we can see:)</q>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<lg>
<l>Δήλῳ δή ποτε τοῖον Ἀπόλλωνος παρὰ βωμὸν</l>
<l>[352] Φοίνικος νέον ἔρνος ἀνερχόμενον ἐνόησα.</l>
</lg>

<p>
(<q rend='none'><q>Even so did I
once see the young shoot of a date palm springing
up near the altar of Apollo on Delos.</q><note place='foot'>Odysseus thus refers to Nausicaa in <hi rend='italic'>Odyssey</hi> 6. 162.</note></q>)
</p>

</quote>

<p>
καὶ ἡ δενδρήεσσα τῆς Καλυψοῦς νῆσος καὶ τὰ
τῆς Κίρκης σπήλαια καὶ ὁ Ἀλκίνου κῆπος· εὖ
ἴσθι, τούτων οὐδὲν ὄψει τερπνότερον.
</p>

<p>
(<q>And
consider the wooded island of Calypso and the caves
of Circe and the garden of Alcinous; be assured that
you will never see anything more delightful than
these.</q>)
</p>

<p>
Ἆρα ποθεῖτε καὶ τοὔνομα ὑμῖν φράσω τοῦ
παιδαγωγοῦ, καὶ ὅστις ὢν γένος ταῦτα ἔλεγε;
βάρβαρος νὴ θεοὺς καὶ θεάς, Σκύθης μὲν τὸ γένος,
ὁμώνυμος δὲ τοῦ τὸν Ξέρξην ἀναπείσαντος ἐπὶ
τὴν Ἑλλάδα στρατεῦσαι, καὶ τὸ πολυθρύλητον
τοῦτο δὴ [B] πρὸ μηνῶν μὲν εἴκοσι προσκυνούμενον
ὄνομα, νυνὶ δὲ προφερόμενον ἀντ᾽ ἀδικήματος καὶ
ὀνείδους, εὐνοῦχος ἦν, ὑπὸ τὠμῷ τεθραμμένος
πάππῳ, τὴν μητέρα τὴν ἐμὴν ὅπως ἀγάγοι διὰ
τῶν Ὁμήρου καὶ Ἡσιόδου ποιημάτων. ἐπεὶ δ᾽
ἐκείνη πρῶτον ἐμὲ καὶ μόνον τεκοῦσα μησὶν
ὕστερον ὀλίγοις ἐτελεύτησεν ὑπὸ τῆς ἀμήτορος
παρθένου πολλῶν [C] συμφορῶν ἐκκλαπεῖσα κόρη
καὶ νέα, μετ᾽ ἐνιαυτὸν ἕβδομον αὐτῷ παρεδόθην.
οὗτος ἐξ ἐκείνου ταῦτα ἀνέπεισεν ἄγων ἐς διδασκάλου
μίαν ὁδόν· ἄλλην δ᾽ οὔτ᾽ αὐτὸς εἰδέναι
<pb n='462'/><anchor id='Pg462'/><anchor id='Pg463'/>
θέλων οὔτ᾽ ἐμοὶ βαδίζειν ξυγχωρῶν ἐποίησεν
ἀπεχθάνεσθαί με πᾶσιν ὑμῖν. ἀλλ᾽, εἰ δοκεῖ,
σπεισώμεθα πρὸς αὐτὸν ἐγώ τε καὶ ὑμεῖς τὴν
ἀπέχθειαν λύσαντες. οὔτε γὰρ ἠπίστατο πρὸς
ὑμᾶς ἀφιξόμενον οὔτ᾽, εἰ τὰ μάλιστα φοιτᾶν
μέλλοιμι, [D] ὅτι καὶ ἄρχων προσεδόκα, καὶ τοσαύτην
ἀρχήν, ὅσην ἔδωκαν οἱ θεοί, πολλὰ ὁμοῦ βιασάμενοι,
πείσθητέ μοι, καὶ τὸν διδόντα καὶ τὸν
δεχόμενον. ἐῴκει γὰρ ἡμῶν οὐδέτερος ἐθέλειν
οὔτε ὁ διδοὺς τὴν τιμὴν ἢ χάριν ἢ ὅ,τι φίλον ὑμῖν
αὐτὸ ὀνομάζειν δοῦναι, καὶ ὁ λαμβάνων, ὡς ἴσασιν
οἱ θεοὶ πάντες, ἀληθῶς ἠρνεῖτο. καὶ δὴ τοῦτο μὲν
ὅπῃ τοῖς θεοῖς φίλον ἔχει τε καὰ ἕξει. τυχὸν δὲ ὁ
παιδαγωγὸς εἰ προύγνω τοῦτο, [353] πολλὴν ἂν ἐποιήσατο
προμήθειαν, ὅπως ὅ,τι μάλιστα ὑμῖν φανείην
κεχαρισμένος.
</p>

<p>
(And now do you want me to tell you also my
tutor's name and the nationality of the man who
used to say these things? He was a barbarian, by
the gods and goddesses; by birth he was a Scythian,
and he had the same name<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> Mardonius; it was a Sophistic mannerism to use
such a periphrasis instead of giving the name directly; see
vol. i. <hi rend='italic'>Introduction</hi>, p. xi.</note> as the man who
persuaded Xerxes to invade Greece. Moreover he
was a eunuch, a word which, twenty months ago,<note place='foot'>Constantius was under the influence of the powerful
eunuchs of his court; they had been expelled by Julian, but
Mardonius was an exception to his class.</note>
was constantly heard and revered, though it is now
applied as an insult and a term of abuse. He had
been brought up under the patronage of my grandfather,
in order that he might instruct my mother<note place='foot'>Basilina.</note>
in the poems of Homer and Hesiod. And since she,
after giving birth to me her first and only child,
died a few months later, snatched away while she
was still a young girl by the motherless maiden<note place='foot'>Athene.</note>
from so many misfortunes that were to come, I was
handed over to him after my seventh year. From
that time he won me over to these views of his, and
led me to school by one straight path; and since
neither he himself desired to know any other nor
allowed me to travel by any other path, it is he who
has caused me to be hated by all of you. However,
if you agree, let us make a truce with him, you and
I, and make an end of our quarrel. For he neither
knew that I should visit you nor did he anticipate
that, even supposing I was likely to come here, it
would be as a ruler, and that too over so great an
empire as the gods bestowed on me; though they
did not do so, believe me, without using great
compulsion both towards him who offered and him
who accepted it. For neither of us had the air of
being willing; since he who offered that honour or
favour or whatever you may please to call it, was
unwilling to bestow it, while he who received it was
sincere in steadily refusing it. This matter, however,
is and shall be as the gods will. But perhaps if my
tutor had foreseen this he would have exercised much
forethought to the end that I might, as far as
possible, seem agreeable in your eyes.)
</p>

<p>
Εἶτα οὐκ ἔξεστιν ἀποθέσθαι νῦν καὶ μεταμαθεῖν
εἴ τι πρότερον ἡμῖν ἄγροικον ἦθος ἐνετράφη;
Ἔθος, φασί, δευτέρη φύσις· φύσει μάχεσθαι δ᾽
ἔργον, ἐτῶν τριάκοντα μελέτην ἀφεῖναι παγχάλεπον
ἄλλως τε καὶ μετὰ τοσαύτης ἐγγενομένην τῆς
χαλεπότητος· ἐμοὶ δὲ ἤδη πλείω τούτων ἐστίν.
Εἶεν· [B] ἀλλὰ τί παθὼν αὐτὸς ἐπιχειρεῖς ἀκροᾶσθαι
περὶ τῶν συμβολαίων καὶ δικάζειν; οὐ γὰρ δὴ καὶ
τοῦτό σε ὁ παιδαγωγὸς ἐδίδασκεν, ὃς οὐδ᾽ εἰ ἄρξεις
ἠπίστατο. Δεινὸς δὲ ἀνέπεισε γέρων, ὃν καὶ ὑμειῖς
<pb n='464'/><anchor id='Pg464'/><anchor id='Pg465'/>
ὡς ὄντα μάλιστα αἰτιώτατον τῶν ἐμῶν ἐπιτηδευμάτων
ὀρθῶς ποιοῦντες ξυλλοιδορεῖτέ μοι, καὶ
τοῦτον δ᾽, εὖ ἴστε, ὑπ᾽ ἄλλων ἐξηπατημένον.
ὀνόματα ἥκει πρὸς ὑμᾶς πολλάκις κωμῳδούμενα,
Πλάτων καὶ Σωκράτης καὶ Ἀριστοτέλης καὶ
Θεόφραστος. [C] ἐκείνοις ὁ γέρων οὗτος πεισθεὶς ὑπ᾽
ἀφροσύνης, ἔπειτα ἐμὲ νέον εὑρών, ἐραστὴν λόγων,
ἀνέπεισεν, ὡς, εἰ τὰ πάντα ἐκείνων ζηλωτὴς γενοίμην,
ἀμείνων ἔσομαι τῶν μὲν ἄλλων ἀνθρώπων
ἴσως οὐδενός· οὐ γὰρ εἶναί μοι πρὸς αὐτοὺς τὴν
ἅμιλλαν· ἐμαυτοῦ δὲ πάντως. ἐγὼ δέ· οὐ γὰρ
εἶχον ὅ,τι ποιῶ· πεισθεὶς οὐκέτι δύναμαι μεταθέσθαι,
καὶ ταῦτα ἐθέλων πολλάκις, [D] ἀλλ᾽ ὀνειδίζω
μὲν ἐμαυτῷ, διότι μὴ ποιῶ πᾶσιν ἄδειαν<note place='foot'>πᾶσιν ἄδειαν Cobet, πᾶσι πᾶσαν ἄδειαν Hertlein, MSS.</note> ἁπάντων
ἀδικημάτων· ὕπεισι δέ με ἐκ τῶν Πλάτωνος ὅσα
ὁ Ἀθηναῖος διεξῆλθε ξένος, <q>Τίμιος μὲν δὴ καὶ ὁ
μηδὲν ἀδικῶν, ὁ δὲ μηδ᾽ ἐπιτρέπων τοῖς ἀδικοῦσιν
ἀδικεῖν πλέον ἢ διπλασίας τιμῆς ἄξιος ἐκείνου·
ὁ μὲν γὰρ ἑνός, ὁ δὲ πολλῶν ἀντάξιος ἑτέρων,
μηνύων τὴν τῶν ἄλλων τοῖς ἄρχουσιν ἀδικίαν. ὁ
δὲ καὶ συγκολάζων εἰς δύναμιν τοῖς ἄρχουσιν, [354] ὁ
μέγας ἀνὴρ ἐν πόλει καὶ τέλειος, οὗτος ἀναγορευέσθω
νικηφόρος ἀρετῆς. τὸν αὐτὸν δὴ τοῦτον
ἔπαινον καὶ περὶ σωφροσύνης χρὴ λέγειν καὶ
περὶ φρονήσεως καὶ ὅσα ἄλλα ἀγαθά τις κέκτηται,
<pb n='466'/><anchor id='Pg466'/><anchor id='Pg467'/>
δυνατὰ μὴ μόνον αὐτὸν ἔχειν, ἀλλὰ καὶ
ἄλλοις μεταδιδόναι.</q>
</p>

<p>
(What then, you will ask, is it not possible even
now for me to lay aside my character, and to repent
of the boorish temper that was bred in me in
earlier days? Habit, as the saying goes, is second
nature. But to fight with nature is hard; and to
shake off the training of thirty years is very difficult,
especially when it was carried on with such painful
effort, and I am already more than thirty years old.
<q>Well and good,</q> you answer, <q>but what is the
matter with you that you try to hear and decide
cases about contracts? For surely your tutor did
not teach you this also, since he did not even know
whether you would govern.</q> Yes, it was that terrible
old man who convinced me that I ought to do so;
and you also do well to help me to abuse him,
since he is of all men most responsible for my
way of life; though he too, you must know, had
in his turn been misled by others. Theirs are
names that you have often met when they are
ridiculed in Comedy&mdash;I mean Plato and Socrates,
Aristotle and Theophrastus. This old man in his
folly was first convinced by them, and then he
got hold of me, since I was young and loved
literature, and convinced me that if I would
emulate those famous men in all things I should
become better, not perhaps than other men&mdash;for it
was not with them that I had to compete&mdash;but
certainly better than my former self. Accordingly,
since I had no choice in the matter, I obeyed him,
and now I am no longer able to change my character,
though indeed I often wish I could, and I blame
myself for not granting to all men impunity for all
wrong-doing. But then the words of the Athenian
stranger in Plato occur to my mind: <q>Though he who
does no wrong himself is worthy of honour, he who
does not allow the wicked to do wrong is worthy of
more than twice as much honour. For whereas the
former is responsible for one man only, the latter is
responsible for many others besides himself, when
he reports to the magistrates the wrong-doing
of the rest. And he who as far as he can helps
the magistrates to punish wrong-doers, himself being
the great and powerful man in the city, let him
I say be proclaimed as winner of the prize for
virtue. And we ought to utter the same eulogy
with regard to temperance also, and wisdom and
all the other good qualities that such a man
possesses, and which are such that he is able
not only to have them himself but also to impart
them to other men.</q><note place='foot'>Plato, <hi rend='italic'>Laws</hi> 730 <hi rend='smallcaps'>d</hi>.</note>)
</p>

<p>
Ταῦτα ἐδίδασκέ με νομίζων ἰδιώτην ἔσεσθαι·
[B] καὶ γὰρ οὐδὲ προύγνω ταύτην ἐκ Διός μοι τὴν
τύχην ἐσομένην, εἰς ἣν νῦν ὁ θεὸς φέρων κατέστησεν.
ἐγὼ δὲ αἰσχυνόμενος ἄρχων ἰδιώτου φαυλότερος
εἶναι λέληθα ἐμαυτόν, οὐδὲν δέον, ὑμῖν
τῆς ἀγροικίας μεταδιδοὺς τῆς ἐμαυτοῦ. καί με
ἕτερος τῶν Πλάτωνος νόμων ὑπομνησθέντα ἐμαυτοῦ
πεποίηκεν ἀπεχθάνεσθαι πρὸς ὑμᾶς, ὅς φησι
δεῖν αἰδῶ καὶ σωφροσύνην ἀσκεῖν τοὺς ἄρχοντας
καὶ τοὺς πρεσβυτέρους, [C] ἵνα τὰ πλήθη πρὸς αὐτοὺς
ἀποβλέποντα κοσμῆται. μόνῳ οὖν μοι, μᾶλλον
δὲ ξὺν ὀλίγοις ἐπιτηδεύοντι νῦν τοῦτο πρὸς θάτερα
περιέστη καὶ γέγονεν οὐκ ἀπεικότως ἐν ὀνείδει.
ἑπτὰ γάρ ἐσμεν οἵδε παρ᾽ ὑμῖν ξένοι νεήλυδες, εἷς
δὲ καὶ πολίτης ὑμέτερος, Ἑρμῇ φίλος καὶ ἐμοί,
λόγων ἀγαθὸς δημιουργός, οἷς οὐδέν ἐστι πρός τινα
συμβόλαιον, οὐδ᾽ ἄλλην ὁδὸν βαδίζομεν ἦ πρὸς
τὰ τῶν θεῶν ἱερά, [D] καὶ ὀλιγάκις, οὐ πάντες, εἰς τὰ
θέατρα, πεποιημένοι τὸ δυσκλεέστατον τῶν ἔργων
<pb n='468'/><anchor id='Pg468'/><anchor id='Pg469'/>
καὶ ἐπονειδιστότατον<note place='foot'>ἐπονειδιστότατον Hertlein suggests, ἐπονείδιστον MSS.</note> τοῦ βίου τέλος· ἐπιτρέψουσί
μοι πάντως οἱ τῶν Ἑλλήνων σοφοὶ φάναι
τι τῶν παρ᾽ ὑμῖν ἐπιπολαζόντων· οὐ γὰρ ἔχω
πῶς ἂν αὐτὸ μᾶλλον ἐνδειξαίμην· ἐπὶ τῆς μεσιτείας
αὑτοὺς ἐτάξαμεν, οὕτω περὶ πολλοῦ ποιούμεθα
τὸ προσκρούειν ὑμῖν καὶ ἀπεχθάνεσθαι, δέον
ἀρέσκειν καὶ θωπεύειν. ὁ δεῖνα ἐβιάσατο τὸν
δεῖνα. Τί τοῦτο, ὦ μῶρε, πρὸς σέ; κοινωνεῖν ἐξὸν
μετ᾽ εὐνοίας τῶν ἀδικημάτων, ἀφεὶς τὸ κέρδος
ἔχθραν ἐπαναιρῇ, [355] καὶ τοῦτο ποιῶν ὀρθῶς οἴει
ποιεῖν καὶ φρονεῖν ὑπὲρ τῶν σεαυτοῦ. λογίσασθαι
ἐχρῆν, ὅτι τῶν μὲν ἀδικουμένων οὐδεὶς
αἰτιᾶται τοὺς ἄρχοντας, ἀλλὰ τὸν ἀδικήσαντα,
ὁ δ᾽ ἀδικῶν εἶτα εἰργόμενος, ἀφεὶς μέμφεσθαι
τὸν ἀδικούμενον, εἰς τοὺς ἄρχοντας τρέπει τὸ
ἄχθος.
</p>

<p>
(These things he taught me when he thought that
I should be a private citizen. For he certainly did
not foresee that there would be assigned to me by
Zeus this lot in life to which the god has now
brought me and has set me therein. But I, because
I was ashamed to be less virtuous as a ruler than
I had been as a private citizen, have unconsciously
given you the benefit of my own boorishness,
though there was no necessity. And another of
Plato's laws has made me take thought for myself
and so become hateful in your eyes: I mean the law
which says that those who govern, and also the older
men, ought to train themselves in respect for others
and in self-control, in order that the masses may
look to them and so order their own lives aright.
Now since I alone, or rather in company with a
few others, am now pursuing this course, it has had
a very different result and has naturally become
a reproach against me. For we here are only
seven persons, strangers and newcomers in your
city,&mdash;though indeed one of our number is a fellow-citizen
of yours, a man dear to Hermes and to
me, an excellent craftsman of discourses.<note place='foot'>Julian refers to Libanius the famous rhetorician; with
him were also Maximus of Ephesus, Priscus, Himerius and
Oreibasius the physician.</note> And
we have business dealings with no man, nor do we
go by any road that does not lead to the temples of
the gods; and seldom, and then not all of us, do
we go to the theatres, since we have adopted the
most inglorious line of conduct and the most
unpopular aim and end of life. The wise men
of Greece will surely allow me to repeat some of
the sayings current among you; for I have no
better way of illustrating what I mean. We have
stationed ourselves in the middle of the road, so
highly do we prize the opportunity to collide
with you and to be disliked, when we ought rather
to try to please and flatter you. <q>So-and-so has
oppressed So-and-so.</q> <q rend='pre'>Fool! What business is it
of yours? When it was in your power to win his
good-will by becoming the partner in his wrong-doing,
you first let the profit go, and incur hatred
besides; and when you do this you think that you
are doing right and are wise about your own affairs.
You ought to have taken into account that, when
men are wronged, not one of them ever blames the
magistrates but only the man who has wronged him;
but the man who seeks to do wrong and is prevented
from it, far from blaming his proposed victim, turns
his grievance against the magistrates.</q>)
</p>

<p>
Ἐξὸν οὖν ὑπὸ τῆς εὐλογιστίας ταύτης ἀπέχεσθαι
μὲν τοῦ τὰ δίκαια ποιεῖν ἀναγκάζειν,
ἐπιτρέψαι δ᾽ ἑκάστῳ πράττειν ὅ, τι [B] ἂν ἐθέλῃ καὶ
δυνατὸς ᾖ· τὸ γὰρ τῆς πόλεως ἦθος οἶμαι τοιοῦτόν
ἐστιν, ἐλεύθερον λίαν· σὺ δὲ οὐ ξυνεὶς ἄρχεσθαι
αὐτοὺς μετὰ φρονήσεως ἀξιοῖς; οὐδ᾽ ἀπέβλεψας
ὅση καὶ μέχρι τῶν ὄνων ἐστὶν ἐλευθερία παρ᾽
αὐτοῖς καὶ τῶν καμήλων; ἄγουσί τοι καὶ ταύτας
οἱ μισθωτοὶ διὰ τῶν στοῶν ὥσπερ τὰς νύμφας·
οἱ γὰρ ὑπαίθριοι στενωποὶ καὶ αἱ πλατεῖαι τῶν
ὁδῶν οὐκ ἐπὶ τούτῳ δήπου πεποίηνται, τῷ χρῆσθαι
<pb n='470'/><anchor id='Pg470'/><anchor id='Pg471'/>
αὐταῖς τοὺς κανθηλίους, ἀλλ᾽ ἐκεῖναι μὲν
αὐτὸ δὴ τοῦτο κόσμου τινὸς ἕνεκα πρόκεινται καὶ
πολυτελείας, [C] χρῆσθαι δὲ ὑπ᾽ ἐλευθερίας οἱ ὄνοι
βούλονται ταῖς στοαῖς, εἴργει δ᾽ αὐτοὺς οὐδεὶς
οὐδενός, ἵνα μὴ τὴν ἐλευθερίαν ἀφέληται· οὕτως
ἡ πόλις ἐστὶν ἐλευθέρα. σὺ δὲ ἀξιοῖς τοὺς ἐν αὐτῇ
νεανίσκους ἄγειν ἡσυχίαν καὶ μάλιστα μὲν φρονεῖν
ὅ, τι σοι φίλον, εἰ δὲ μή, φθέγγεσθαι ὅσων
ἂν ἡδέως ἀκούσῃς.<note place='foot'>ἀκούσῃς Hertlein suggests, ἀκούσαις MSS.</note> οἱ δὲ ὑπ᾽ ἐλευθερίας εἰώθασι
κωμάζειν, ἀεὶ μὲν ἐπιεικῶς αὐτὸ ποιοῦντες, ἐν δὲ
ταῖς ἑορταῖς πλέον.
</p>

<p>
(<q>Then when it was in your power by the aid of this
careful reasoning to refrain from compelling us to do
what is just; when you might have allowed every
man to do whatever he pleases and has the power to
do,&mdash;for the temper of the city is surely like that,
excessively independent&mdash;do you then, I say, fail to
understand this and assert that the citizens ought to
be wisely governed? Have you not even observed
what great independence exists among the citizens,
even down to the very asses and camels? The
men who hire them out lead even these animals
through the porticoes as though they were brides.
For the unroofed alleys and the broad highways
were certainly not made for the use of pack-asses,
but they are provided merely for show and as an
extravagance; but in their independence the asses
prefer to use the porticoes, and no one keeps them
out of any one of these, for fear he should be robbing
them of their independence; so independent is our
city! And yet you think that even the charming
youths in the city ought to keep quiet and, if possible,
think whatever you like, but at any rate utter only
what is agreeable for you to hear! But it is their
independence that makes them hold revels; and this
they always do handsomely, but during the festivals
they revel more than usual.</q>)
</p>

<p>
Ἔδωκάν ποτε τῶν τοιούτων σκωμμάτων Ῥωμαίοις
Ταραντῖνοι δίκας, [D] ὅτι μεθύοντες ἐν τοῖς
Διονυσίοις ὕβρισαν αὐτῶν τὴν πρεσβείαν.
ὑμεῖς δέ ἐστε τῶν Ταραντίνων τὰ πάντα εὐδαιμονέστεροι,
ἀντὶ μὲν ὀλίγων ἡμερῶν ὅλον εὐπαθοῦντες
ἐνιαυτόν, ἀντὶ δὲ τῶν ξένων πρέσβεων εἰς
αὐτοὺς ἐξυβρίζοντες τοὺς ἄρχοντας καὶ τούτων
εἰς τὰς ἐπὶ τοῦ γενείου τρίχας καὶ τὰ ἐν τοῖς
νομίσμασι χαράγματα. [356] εὖ γε, ὦ πολῖται σώφρονες,
οἵ τε παίζοντες τὰ τοιαῦτα καὶ οἱ τῶν
παιζόντων ἀποδεχόμενοι καὶ ἀπολαύοντες. δῆλον
γάρ, ὅτι τοῖς μὲν ἡδονὴν παρέχει τὸ λέγειν, τοὺς
δὲ τὸ ἀκροᾶσθαι τῶν τοιούτων σκωμμάτων εὐφραίνει.
ταύτης ὑμῖν ἐγὼ τῆς ὁμονοίας συνήδομαι,
καὶ εὖ γε ποιεῖτε μία δὴ πόλις ὄντες τὰ τοιαῦτα,
ὡς ἐκεῖνό γε οὐδαμοῦ σπουδαῖον οὐδὲ ζηλωτὸν
εἴργειν [B] καὶ κολάζειν τῶν νέων τὸ ἀκόλαστον.
παραιρεῖσθαι γάρ ἐστι καὶ ἀποθραύειν τῆς ἐλευθερίας
τὸ κεφάλαιον, εἴ τις ἀφέλοιτο τοῦ λέγειν
<pb n='472'/><anchor id='Pg472'/><anchor id='Pg473'/>
καὶ πράττειν ὅ,τι βούλονται τοὺς ἀνθρώπους.
ὀρθῶς οὖν ὑμεῖς τοῦτο εἰδότες, ὅτι δεῖ τὰ πάντα
ἐλευθέρους εἶναι, πρῶτον ἐπετρέψατε ταῖς γυναιξὶν
ἄρχειν αὑτῶν, ἵνα ὑμῖν ὦσι λίαν ἐλεύθεραι καὶ
ἀκόλαστοι, εἶτα ἐκείναις ξυνεχωρήσατε ἀνάγειν τὰ
παιδία, [C] μή ποτε ὑμῖν ἀρχῆς πειρώμενα τραχυτέρας
ἔπειτα ἀποφανθῇ δοῦλα, καὶ γενόμενα μειράκια
πρῶτον αἰδεῖσθαι διδαχθῇ τοὺς πρεσβυτέρους,
ὑπὸ δὲ τῆς οὕτω κακῆς συνηθείας εὐλαβέστερα
γένηται πρὸς τοὺς ἄρχοντασ, καὶ τέλος οὐκ εἰς
ἄνδρας, ἀλλ᾽ εἰς ἀνδράποδα τελέσαντες καὶ γενόμενοι
σώφρονες καὶ ἐπιεικεῖς καὶ κόσμιοι λάθωσι
διαφθαρέντες παντάπασι. τί οὖν αἱ γυναῖκες; ἐπὶ
τὰ σφέτερα σεβάσματα ἄγουσιν αὐτὰ δι᾽ ἡδονῆς,
ὃ δη μακαριώτατον εἶναι [D] φαίνεται καὶ πολυτίμητον
οὐκ ἀνθρώποις μόνον, ἀλλὰ καὶ θηρίοις.
ἔνθεν οἶμαι συμβαίνει μάλα ὑμῖν εὐδαίμοσιν εἶναι
πᾶσαν ἀρνουμένοις δουλείαν, ἀπὸ τῆς εἰς τοὺς
θεοὺς ἀρξαμένοις<note place='foot'>ἀρξαμένοις before πρῶτον Hertlein suggests, Klimek ἀποστᾶσι
τῆς for ἀπὸ τῆς.</note> πρῶτον, εἶτα τοὺς νόμους καὶ
τρίτον τοὺς νομοφύλακας ἡμᾶς. ἄτοποί τε ἂν
εἴημεν ἡμεῖς, εἰ τῶν θεῶν περιορώντων οὕτως
ἐλευθέραν τὴν πόλιν καὶ οὐκ ἐπεξιόντων ἀγανακτοίημεν
καὶ χαλεπαίνοιμεν. [357] εὖ γὰρ ἴστε ὅτι
ταύτης ἡμῖν ἐκοινώνησαν οἱ θεοὶ τῆς ἀτιμίας
παρὰ τῇ πόλει.
</p>

<p>
(Once upon a time the citizens of Tarentum paid
to the Romans the penalty for this sort of jesting,
seeing that, when drunk at the festival of Dionysus,
they insulted the Roman ambassadors.<note place='foot'>In 272 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> the Romans took Tarentum.</note> But you are
in all respects more fortunate than the citizens of
Tarentum, for you give yourselves up to pleasure
throughout the whole year, instead of for a few
days; and instead of foreign ambassadors you insult
your own Sovereign, yes even the very hairs on his chin
and the devices engraved on his coins.<note place='foot'>The people of Antioch ridiculed the Pagan symbols, such
as the figures of Helios, the sun-god, which Julian had
engraved on his coinage.</note> Well done,
O wise citizens, both ye who make such jests and ye
who welcome and find profit in the jesters! For it
is evident that uttering them gives pleasure to the
former, while the latter rejoice to hear jests of this
sort. I share your pleasure in this unanimity, and
you do well to be a city of one mind in such matters,
since it is not at all dignified or an enviable task to
restrain and chastise the licentiousness of the young.
For if one were to rob human beings of the power to
do and say what they please, that would be to take
away and curtail the first principle of independence.
Therefore, since you knew that men ought to be
independent in all respects, you acted quite rightly,
in the first place when you permitted the women to
govern themselves, so that you might profit by their
being independent and licentious to excess; secondly,
when you entrusted to them the bringing up of the
children, for fear that if they had to experience any
harsher authority they might later turn out to be
slaves; and as they grew up to be boys might be
taught first of all to respect their elders, and then
under the influence of this bad habit might show too
much reverence for the magistrates, and finally
might have to be classed not as men but as slaves;
and becoming temperate and well-behaved and orderly
might be, before they knew it, altogether corrupted.
Then what effect have the women on the children?
They induce them to reverence the same things as
they do by means of pleasure, which is, it seems, the
most blessed thing and the most highly honoured,
not only by men but by beasts also. It is for this
reason, I think, that you are so very happy, because
you refuse every form of slavery; first you begin by
refusing slavery to the gods, secondly to the laws,
and thirdly to me who am the guardian of the laws.
And I should indeed be eccentric if, when the gods
suffer the city to be so independent and do not
chastise her, I should be resentful and angry. For
be assured that the gods have shared with me in the
disrespect that has been shown to me in your city.)
</p>

<p>
Τὸ Χῖ, φασίν, οὐδὲν ἠδίκησε τὴν πόλιν οὐδὲ τὸ
Κάππα. τί μέν ἐστι τοῦτο τῆς ὑμετέρας σοφίας
τὸ αἴνιγμα ξυνεῖναι χαλεπόν, τυχόντες δ᾽ ἡμεῖς
<pb n='474'/><anchor id='Pg474'/><anchor id='Pg475'/>
ἐξηγητῶν ἀπὸ τῆς ὑμετέρας πόλεως ἐδιδάχθημεν
ἀρχὰς ὀνομάτων εἶναι τὰ γράμματα, δηλοῦν δ᾽
ἐθέλειν τὸ μὲν Χριστόν, τὸ δὲ Κωνστάντιον.
ἀνέχεσθε οὖν [B] μου λέγοντος μετὰ παρρησίας.
ἓν μόνον ὑμᾶς ὁ Κωνστάντιος ἠδίκησεν, ὅτι
με καίσαρα ποιήσας οὐκ ἀπέκτεινεν· ὡς τά γε
ἄλλα ὑμῖν μόνοις ἐκ πάντων Ῥωμαίων πολλῶν
δοῖεν οἱ θεοὶ Κωνσταντίων πειραθῆναι, μᾶλλον
δὲ τῶν ἐκείνου φίλων τῆς πλεονεξίας. ἐμοὶ γὰρ
ὁ ἀνὴρ καὶ ἀνεψιὸς ἐγένετο καὶ φίλος. ἐπεὶ
δὲ πρὸ τῆς φιλίας εἵλετο τὴν ἔχθραν, εἶτα ἡμῖν
οἱ θεοὶ τὸν πρὸς ἀλλήλους ἀγῶνα λίαν ἐβράβευσαν
φιλανθρώπως, [C] ἐγενόμην αὐτῷ πιστότερος
φίλος ἢ προσεδόκησεν ἕξειν με πρῖν ἐχθρὸν
γενέσθαι. τί οὖν οἴεσθέ με τοῖς ἐκείνου λυπεῖν
ἐγκωμίοις, ὃς ἄχθομαι τοῖς λοιδορουμένοις αὐτῷ;
Χριστὸν δὲ ἀγαπῶντες ἔχετε πολιοῦχον ἀντὶ
τοῦ Διὸς καὶ τοῦ Δαφναίου καὶ τῆς Καλλιίπης,
ἣ τὸ σόφισμα ὑμῶν ἀπεγύμνωσεν. Ἐμισηνοὶ
Χριστὸν ἐπόθουν οἱ πῦρ ἐμβαλόντες τοῖς τάφοις
τῶν Γαλιλαίων; ἐλύπησα δ᾽ ἐγὼ τίνας Ἐμισηνῶν
πώποτε; [D] ὑμῶν μέντοι πολλοὺς καὶ ὀλίγου δέω
φάναι πάντας, τὴν βουλήν, τοὺς εὐπόρους, τὸν
δῆμον. ὁ μὲν γὰρ δῆμος ἄχθεταί μοι τῷ πλείστῳ
μέρει, μᾶλλον δ᾽ ἅπας ἀθεότητα προελόμενος,
<pb n='476'/><anchor id='Pg476'/><anchor id='Pg477'/>
ὅτι τοῖς πατρίοις ὁρᾷ τῆς ἁγιστείας θεσμοῖς
προσκείμενον, οἱ δὲ δυνατοὶ κωλυόμενοι πολλοῦ
πάντα πωλεῖν ἀργυρίου, πάντες δὲ ὑπὲρ τῶν
ὀρχηστῶν καὶ τῶν θεάτρων, οὐχ ὅτι τοὺς ἄλλους
ἀποστερῶ τούτων, [358] ἀλλ᾽ ὅτι μέλει μοι τῶν τοιούτων
ἧττον ἢ τῶν ἐν τοῖς τέλμασι βατράχων.
εἶτα οὐκ εἰκότως ἐμαυτοῦ κατηγορῶ τοσαύτας
ἀπεχθείας λαβὰς παρασχόντος;
</p>

<p>
(<q>The <hi rend='italic'>Chi</hi>,</q> say the citizens, <q>never harmed the
city in any way, nor did the <hi rend='italic'>Kappa</hi>.</q> Now the
meaning of this riddle which your wisdom has
invented is hard to understand, but I obtained interpreters
from your city and I was informed that these
are the first letters of names, and that the former is
intended to represent Christ, the latter Constantius.
Bear with me then, if I speak frankly. In one thing
Constantius did harm you, in that when he had
appointed me as Caesar he did not put me to death.
Now for the rest may the gods grant to you alone
out of all the many citizens of Rome to have
experience of the avarice of many a Constantius, or
I should say rather, of the avarice of his friends. For
the man was my cousin and dear to me; but after
he had chosen enmity with me instead of friendship,
and then the gods with the utmost benevolence
arbitrated our contention with one another, I
proved myself a more loyal friend to him than he
had expected to find me before I became his enemy.
Then why do you think that you are annoying me
by your praises of him, when I am really angry with
those who slander him? But as for Christ you love
him, you say, and adopt him as the guardian of your
city instead of Zeus and the god of Daphne and
Calliope<note place='foot'>There was a statue of Calliope in the market-place at
Antioch.</note> who revealed your clever invention? Did
those citizens of Emesa long for Christ who set fire
to the tombs of the Galilaeans?<note place='foot'>The people of Emesa burned the Christian churches and
spared only one, which they converted into a temple of
Dionysus.</note> But what citizens
of Emesa have I ever annoyed? I have however
annoyed many of you, I may almost say all, the
Senate, the wealthy citizens, the common people.
The latter indeed, since they have chosen atheism,
hate me for the most part, or rather all of them hate
me because they see that I adhere to the ordinances
of the sacred rites which our forefathers observed;
the powerful citizens hate me because they are prevented
from selling everything at a high price; but all
of you hate me on account of the dancers and the
theatres. Not because I deprive others of these
pleasures, but because I care less for things of that
sort than for frogs croaking in a pond.<note place='foot'>A proverb to express complete indifference.</note> Then is it
not natural for me to accuse myself, when I have
furnished so many handles for your hatred?)
</p>

<p>
Ἀλλ᾽ ὁ Ῥωμαῖος Κάτων, ὅπως μὲν ἔχων
πώγωνος οὐκ οἶδα, παρ᾽ ὁντινοῦν δὲ τῶν ἐπὶ
σωφροσύνῃ καὶ μεγαλοψυχίᾳ καὶ τὸ μέγιστον
ἀνδρείᾳ μέγα φρονούντων ἄξιος ἐπαινεῖσθαι,
προσιὼν τῇδε τῇ πολυανθρώπῳ καὶ τρυφερᾷ καὶ
πλουσίᾳ πόλει [B] τοὺς ἐφήβους ἰδὼν ἐν τῷ προαστείῳ
μετὰ τῶν ἀρχόντων ἐσταλμένους ὡς ἐπί
τινα δορυφορίαν ἐνόμισεν αὑτοῦ χάριν ὑμῶν τοὺς
προγόνους τὴν παρασκευὴν πᾶσαν πεποιῆσθαι·
καὶ θᾶσσον ἀποβὰς τοῦ ἵππου προῆγεν ἅμα
καὶ πρὸς τοὺς προλαβόντας τῶν φίλων δυσχεραίνων
ὡς μηνυτὰς γενομένους αὐτοῖς, ὅτι Κάτων
προσάγει, καὶ ἀναπείσαντας ἐκδραμεῖν. ὄντος
δ᾽ ἐν τοιούτοις αὐτοῦ καὶ διαποροῦντος ἠρέμα
καὶ ἐρυθριῶντος, ὁ γυμνασίαρχος προσδραμών,
Ὦ ξένε, ἔφη, [C] ποῦ Δημήτριος; ἦν δ᾽ οὗτος
ἀπελεύθερος Πομπηίου, κεκτημένος οὐσίαν πολλὴν
πάνυ· μέτρον δ᾽ αὐτῆς εἰ ποθεῖτε μαθεῖν·
οἶμαι γὰρ ὑμᾶς ἐκ πάντων τῶν λεγομένων πρὸς
<pb n='478'/><anchor id='Pg478'/><anchor id='Pg479'/>
ταύτην μάλιστα ὡρμῆσθαι τὴν ἀκοήν· ἐγὼ τὸν
εἰπόντα φράσω. Δαμοφίλῳ τῷ Βιθυνῷ πεποίηται
συγγράμματα τοιαῦτα, ἐν οἷς δρεπόμενος ἐκ
βίβλων πολλῶν<note place='foot'>ἐκ βίβλων πολλῶν Hertlein suggests, ἐκ τῶν πολλῶν MSS.</note> εἰργάσατο [D] λόγους ἡδίστους
νέῳ φιληκόῳ καὶ πρεσβυτέρῳ· φιλεῖ γὰρ τὸ
γῆρας ἐπανάγειν αὖθις εἰς τὴν τῶν νέων φιληκοΐαν
τοὺς ἀφηλικεστέρους· ὅθεν οἶμαι συμβαίνει
νέους καὶ πρεσβύτας ἐξ ἴσης εἶναι φιλομύθους·
εἶεν. ὁ δὲ δὴ Κάτων ὅπως ἀπήντησε τῷ γυμνασιάρχῳ
βούλεσθε φράσω; μή με λοιδορεῖν ὑπολάβητε
τὴν πόλιν· οὐκ ἔστιν ὁ λόγος ἐμός.
εἴ τις ἀφῖκται [359] περιφερομένη καὶ εἰς ὑμᾶς ἀκοὴ
Χαιρωνέως ἀνδρὸς ἐκ τοῦ φαύλου γένους, ὁ δὴ
λέγεται παρὰ τῶν ἀλαζόνων φιλόσοφον· οὗ δὴ
καὶ αὐτὸς οὐκ ἐφικόμην μέν, ηὐξάμην δὲ ὑπὸ
ἀμαθίας κοινωνῆσαι καὶ μετασχεῖν. ταῦτα οὖν
ἐκεῖνος ἔφρασεν, ὡς ὁ Κάτων ἀπεκρίνατο μὲν
οὐδέν, βοήσας δὲ μόνον οἷά τις ἔμπληκτος καὶ
ἀνόητος ἄνθρωπος, Ὢ τῆς κακοδαίμονος πόλεως,
ἀπιὼν ᾤχετο.
</p>

<p>
(Cato the Roman,<note place='foot'>The anecdote which follows is told by Plutarch in his
<hi rend='italic'>Cato the Younger</hi> and also in his <hi rend='italic'>Pompeius</hi>.</note> however,&mdash;how he wore his beard
I do not know,<note place='foot'>Julian must have known that in Cato's day the Romans
never wore beards.</note> but he deserves to be praised in comparison
with anyone of those who pride themselves
on their temperance and nobility of soul and on their
courage above all,&mdash;he, I say, once visited this populous
and luxurious and wealthy city; and when he
saw the youths in the suburb drawn up in full array,
and with them the magistrates, as though for some
military display, he thought your ancestors had made
all those preparations in his honour. So he quickly
dismounted from his horse and came forward, though
at the same time he was vexed with those of his
friends who had preceded him for having informed
the citizens that Cato was approaching, and so
induced them to hasten forth. And while he was in
this position, and was slightly embarrassed and
blushing, the master of the gymnasium ran to meet
him and called out <q>Stranger, where is Demetrius?</q>
Now this Demetrius was a freedman of Pompey, who
had acquired a very large fortune; and if you want
to know the amount of it,&mdash;for I suppose that in all
that I am now telling you are most anxious to hear
this,&mdash;I will tell you who has related the story.
Damophilus of Bithynia has written compositions of
this sort, and in them, by culling ancedotes from
many books, he has produced tales that give the
greatest delight to anyone who loves to listen to
gossip, whether he be young or old. For old age
usually revives in the elderly that love of gossip
which is natural to the young; and this is, I think,
the reason why both the old and the young are
equally fond of stories. Well then, to return to
Cato. Do you want me to tell you how he greeted
the master of the gymnasium? Do not imagine that
I am slandering your city; for the story is not my
own.<note place='foot'>cf. <hi rend='italic'>Fragment of a Letter</hi> 299 <hi rend='smallcaps'>c</hi>, note.</note> If any rumour has come round, even to your
ears, of the man of Chaeronea,<note place='foot'>Plutarch.</note> who belongs to that
worthless class of men who are called by impostors
philosophers,&mdash;I myself never attained to that class
though in my ignorance I claimed to be a member of
it and to have part in it,&mdash;well he, as I was saying,
related that Cato answered not a word, but only cried
aloud like a man stricken with madness and out of
his senses, <q>Alas for this ill-fated city!</q> and took
himself off.)
</p>

<p>
Μὴ δὴ θαυμάσητε, τοῦτο εἰ καὶ ἐγὼ νυνὶ
πάσχω πρὸς ὑμᾶς, [B] ἀνὴρ ἀγριώτερος ἐκείνου καὶ
θρασύτερος τοσούτῳ καὶ αὐθαδέστερος, ὅσον οἱ
Κελτοὶ Ῥωμαίων. ὁ μὲν γὰρ ἐκεῖσε τεχθεὶς
ἐγγὺς ἦλθε γήρως ἅμα τοῖς πολίταις τρεφόμενος·
ἐμοὶ δὲ Κελτοὶ καὶ Γερμανοὶ καὶ δρυμὸς Ἑρκύνιος
ἔμελεν ἄρτι πρῶτον εἰς ἄνδρας τελοῦντι, καὶ
διέτριψα πολὺν ἤδη χρόνον, ὥσπερ τις κυνηγέτης
<pb n='480'/><anchor id='Pg480'/><anchor id='Pg481'/>
ἀγρίοις ὁμιλῶν καὶ συμπλεκόμενος θηρίοις, [C] ἤθεσιν
ἐντυγχάνων οὔτε θοπεύειν οὔτε κολακεύειν εἰδόσιν,
ἁπλῶς δὲ καὶ ἐλευθέρως ἐκ τοῦ ἴσου πᾶσι
προσφέρεσθαι. γέγονεν οὖν μοι μετὰ τὴν ἐκ
παίδον τροφὴν ἥ τε ἐν μειρακίοις ὁδὸς διὰ τῶν
Πλάτωνος καὶ Ἀριστοτέλους λόγων οὐδαμῶς
ἐπιτηδείων δήμοις ἐντυγχάνειν οἰομένοις ὑπὸ
τρυφῆς εὐδαιμονεστάτοις<note place='foot'>ἐπιτηδείων&mdash;οἰομένοις&mdash;εὐδαιμονεστάτοις Hertlein suggests,
ἐπιτηδείῳ δήμοις ἐντυγχάνειν καὶ ὑπὸ τρυφῆς εὐδαιμονεστάτῳ
MSS.</note> εἶναι, ἥ τε ἐν ἀνδράσιν
αὐτουργία παρὰ τοῖς μαχιμωτάτοις καὶ θυνικωτάτοις
τῶν ἐθνῶν, ὅπου τὴν γαμηλίαν Ἀφροδίτην
καὶ τὸν μεθυδότην Διόνυσον γάμου τε ἕνεκα
καὶ παιδοποιίας οἴνου τε ὁπόσης ἑκάστῳ δυνατὸν
πόσεως ἴσασι μόνον. [D] ἀσέλγεια δ᾽ οὐκ ἔστιν
ἐν τοῖς θεάτροις οὐδὲ ὕβρις, οὐδὲ ἕλκει τις εἴσω
τῆς σκηνῆς τὸν κόρδακα.
</p>

<p>
(Therefore do not be surprised if I now feel towards
you as I do, for I am more uncivilised than he, and
more fierce and headstrong in proportion as the Celts
are more so than the Romans. He was born in
Rome and was nurtured among Roman citizens till
he was on the threshold of old age. But as for me, I
had to do with Celts and Germans and the Hercynian
forest<note place='foot'>cf. Caesar, <hi rend='italic'>Gallic War</hi>, 6. 24.</note> from the moment that I was reckoned a
grown man, and I have by now spent a long time
there, like some huntsman who associates with and is
entangled among wild beasts. There I met with temperaments
that know not how to pay court or flatter,
but only how to behave simply and frankly to all
men alike. Then after my nurture in childhood, my
path as a boy took me through the discourses of
Plato and Aristotle, which are not at all suited for
the reading of communities who think that on
account of their luxury they are the happiest of men.
Then I had to work hard myself among the most
warlike and high-spirited of all nations, where men
have knowledge of Aphrodite, goddess of Wedlock,
only for the purpose of marrying and having children,
and know Dionysus the Drink-Giver, only for the sake
of just so much wine as each can drink at a draught.
And in their theatres no licentiousness or insolence
exists, nor does any man dance the cordax on their
stage.)
</p>

<p>
Λέγεταί τοι μικρῷ πρόσθεν ὡς ἐνθένδε ἐκεῖσέ
τις Καππαδόκης φυγάς, ἐν τῇ παρ᾽ ὑμῖν τραφεὶς
πόλει παρὰ τῷ χρυσοχίῳ· γνωρίζετε δήπουθεν
ὃν λέγω· μαθὼν ὅπου καὶ ἔμαθεν, ὡς οὐ δέον
ὁμιλεῖν γυναιξί, μειρακίοις δ᾽ ἐπιχειρεῖν, οὐκ
οἶδα ὁπόσα ἐνθάδε δράσας καὶ παθών, [360]ἐπειδὴ
παρὰ τὸν ἐκεῖσε βασιλέα πρῴην ἀφίκετο, μνήμῃ
τῶν τῇδε πολλοὺς μὲν ὀρχηστὰς αὐτοῖς ἐπαγαγεῖν,
ἄλλα δὲ τὰ ἐντεῦθεν ἀγαθὰ τοιαῦτα,
καὶ δή καὶ τέλος ὡς ἐνεδέησεν ἔτι κοτυλιστοῦ·
<pb n='482'/><anchor id='Pg482'/><anchor id='Pg483'/>
τοῦτο δ᾽ ὑμεῖς ἴστε πρὸς τῷ ἔργῳ τὸ ὄνομα· καὶ
τοῦτον ἐνθένδε ἐκάλει πόθῳ καὶ ἔρωτι τῆς σεμνῆς
παρ᾽ ὑμῖν διαίτης. οἱ Κελτοὶ δὲ τὸν μὲν κοτυλιστὴν
ἠγνόησαν, [B] ἐδέξατο γὰρ αὐτὸν αὐτίκα τὰ
βασίλεια, τοὺς ὀρχηστὰς δὲ ἐπιτραπέντας ἐπιδείκνυσθαι<note place='foot'>ἐπιδείκνυσθαι Hertlein would add.</note>
ἐν τῷ θεάτρῳ τὴν τέχνην εἴασαν
οἰόμενοι τοῖς νυμφολήπτοις αὐτοὺς ἐοικέναι. καὶ
ἦν αὐτοῖς ἐκεῖ παραπλησίως ἐμοὶ καταγελαστότατον
τὸ θέατρον· ἀλλ᾽ οἱ μὲν ὀλίγοι πολλῶν
κατεγέλων, ἐγὼ δὲ ξὺν ὀλίγοις ἐνθάδε γελοῖος
ὑμῖν ἅπασι τὰ πάντα φαίνομαι.
</p>

<p>
(A story is told of them that not long ago a certain
Cappadocian was exiled from here to that place, a
man who had been brought up in your city in the
house of the goldsmith&mdash;you know of course whom
I mean,&mdash;and had learned, as he naturally did learn
there, that one ought not to have intercourse with
women but to pay attentions to youths. And when,
after doing and suffering here I know not what, he
went to the court of the king in that country, he
took with him to remind him of your habits here a
number of dancers and other such delights from this
city; and then finally since he still needed a cotylist<note place='foot'>We do not know what sort of performance was given
by a cotylist; he was evidently a mime and may have played
with cups; κοτύλη = a pint-cup.</note>&mdash;you
know the word and the thing too&mdash;he
invited him also from here, because of his longing
and love for the austere mode of life that prevails
with you. Now the Celts never made the acquaintance
of the cotylist, since he was at once admitted
into the palace; but when the dancers began to
display their art in the theatre, the Celts left them
alone because they thought that they were like men
stricken with nympholepsy. And the theatre seemed
to the men in that country highly ridiculous, just as
it does to me; but whereas the Celts were a few
ridiculing many, I here along with a few others seem
absurd in every way to all of you.)
</p>

<p>
[C] Καὶ οὐκ ἀγανακτῶ τῷ πράγματι. καὶ γὰρ ἂν
εἴην ἄδικος εἰ μὴ καὶ τοῖς παροῦσι στέργοιμι,
διαφερόντως ἀσπασάμενος ἐκεῖνα. Κελτοὶ μὲν
γὰρ οὕτω με δι᾽ ὁμοιότητα τρόπων ἠγάπησαν,
ὥστε ἐτόλμησαν οὐχ ὅπλα μόνον ὑπὲρ ἐμοῦ
λαβεῖν, ἀλλὰ καὶ χρήματα ἔδωκαν πολλά, καὶ
παραιτούμενον ὀλίγου καὶ ἐβιάσαντο λαβεῖν, καὶ
πρὸς πάντα ἑτοίμως ὑπήκουσαν. ὃ δὲ δὴ μέγιστον,
ἐκεῖθεν εἰς ὑμᾶς ἐφέρετο πολὺ τὸ ἐμὸν ὄνομα,
καὶ ἐβόων πάντες ἀνδρεῖον, συνετόν, δίκαιον, οὐ
πολέμῳ μόνον ὁμιλῆσαι δεινόν, [D] ἀλλὰ καὶ εἴρηνῃ
χρήσασθαι δεξιόν, εὐπρόσιτον, πρᾷον· ὑμεῖς δὲ
αὐτοῖς ἀντιδεδώκατε νῦν ἐνθένδε πρῶτον μέν, ὅτι
παρ᾽ ἐμὲ τὰ τοῦ κόσμου πράγματα ἀνατέτραπται·
σύνοιδα δὲ οὐδὲν ἀνατρέπων ἐμαυτῷ οὔτε ἑκὼν
οὔτε ἄκων· εἶτα, ὡς ἐκ τοῦ πώγωνός μου χρὴ
πλέκειν σχοινία, καὶ ὅτι πολεμῶ τῷ Χῖ, πόθος δὲ
ὑμᾶς εἴσεισι τοῦ Κάππα. καὶ ὑμῖν γε αὐτὸ οἱ
<pb n='484'/><anchor id='Pg484'/><anchor id='Pg485'/>
πολιοῦχοι τῆσδε τῆς πόλεως θεοὶ διπλοῦν δοῖεν,
ὅτι πρὸς τούτῳ [361] καὶ τὰς ἀστυγείτονας ἐσυκοφαντήσατε
πόλεις ἱερὰς καὶ ὁμοδούλους ἐμοί, ὡς δὴ
παρ᾽ αὐτῶν εἴη τὰ εἰς ἐμὲ ξυντεθέντα, ὃν εὖ οἶδ᾽
ὅτι φιλοῦσιν ἐκεῖναι μᾶλλον ἢ τοὺς ἑαυτῶν υἱέας,
οἳ τὰ μὲν τῶν θεῶν ἀνέστησαν αὐτίκα τεμένη,
τοὺς τάφους δὲ τῶν ἀθέων ἀνέτρεψαν πάντας.
ἀπὸ τοῦ συνθήματος, ὃ δὴ δέδοται παρ᾽ ἐμοῦ
πρῴην, οὕτως ἐπαρθέντες τὸν νοῦν καὶ μετέωροι
γενόμενοι τὴν διάνοιαν, ὡς καὶ πλέον ἐπεξελθεῖν
τοῖς [B] εἰς τοὺς θεοὺς πλημμελοῦσιν ἢ βουλομένῳ
μοι ἦν.
</p>

<p>
(This is a fact which I do not resent. And indeed
it would be unjust of me not to make the best of
the present state of things, after having so greatly
enjoyed the life among the Celts. For they loved
me so much, on account of the similarity of our
dispositions, that not only did they venture to take
up arms on my behalf, but they gave me large sums
of money besides; and when I would have declined
it, they almost forced me to take it, and in all things
readily obeyed me. And what was most wonderful
of all, a great report of me travelled thence to your
city, and all men proclaimed loudly that I was brave,
wise and just, not only terrible to encounter in war,
but also skilful in turning peace to account, easy of
access and mild-tempered. But now you have sent
them tidings from here in return, that in the first
place the affairs of the whole world have been turned
upside down by me&mdash;though indeed I am not conscious
of turning anything upside down, either
voluntarily or involuntarily; secondly, that I ought
to twist ropes from my beard, and that I war against
the <hi rend='italic'>Chi</hi> and that you begin to regret the <hi rend='italic'>Kappa</hi>.
Now may the guardian gods of this city grant you a
double allowance of the <hi rend='italic'>Kappa</hi>!<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> may they have two such rulers as Constantius.</note> For besides this
you falsely accused the neighbouring cities, which
are holy and the slaves of the gods, like myself, of
having produced the satires which were composed
against me; though I know well that those cities
love me more than their own sons, for they at once
restored the shrines of the gods and overturned all
the tombs<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> the sepulchres over which the Christian churches
were built; cf. 357 <hi rend='smallcaps'>c</hi>, note.</note> of the godless, on the signal that was
given by me the other day; and so excited were
they in mind and so exalted in spirit that they even
attacked those who were offending against the gods
with more violence than I could have wished.)
</p>

<p>
Τὰ δ᾽ ὑμέτερα· πολλοὶ μὲν ἐγειρομένους ἄρτι
τοὺς βωμοὺς ἀνέτρεψαν, οὓς ἡ πρᾳότης ἡμῶν
ἐδίδαξε μόλις ἡσυχάζειν. ἐπεὶ δὲ ἀπεπεμψάμεθα
τὸν νεκρὸν τῆς Δάφνης, οἱ μὲν ἀφοσιούμενοι τὰ
πρὸς τοὺς θεοὺς ἐξ ὑμῶν ἀντέδωκαν τοῖς ὑπὲρ τῶν
λειψάνων ἠγανακτηκόσι [C] τοῦ νεκροῦ τὸ τέμενος
τοῦ Δαφναίου θεοῦ, οἱ δὲ εἴτε λαθόντες εἴτε μὴ τὸ
πῦρ ἐνεῖσαν<note place='foot'>ἐνεῖσαν Hertlein suggests, ἔδειξαν MSS.</note> ἐκεῖνο, τοῖς μὲν ἐπιδημοῦσι τῶν ξένων
φρικῶδες, ὑμῶν δὲ τῷ δήμῳ μὲν ἡδονὴν παρασχόν,
<pb n='486'/><anchor id='Pg486'/><anchor id='Pg487'/>
ὑπὸ δὲ τῆς βουλῆς ἀμεληθὲν καὶ εἰσέτι ἀμελούμενον.
ἐμοὶ μὲν οὖν ἐδόκει καὶ πρὸ τοῦ πυρὸς
ἀπολελοιπέναι τὸν νεὼν ὁ θεός, ἐπεσήμηνε γὰρ
εἰσελθόντι μοι πρῶτον τὸ ἄγαλμα, καὶ τούτου
μάρτυρα καλῶ τὸν μέγαν Ἥλιον πρὸς τοὺς
ἀπιστοῦντας, ὑμᾶς δὲ ὑπομνῆσαι βούλομαι καὶ
ἄλλης ἀπεχθείας εμῆς, [D] ἔπειτα, ὅπερ εἴωθα ποιεῖν
ἐπιεικῶς, ὀνειδίσαι ἐμαυτῷ καὶ ὑπὲρ ταύτης καὶ
κατηγορῆσαι καὶ μέμψασθαι.
</p>

<p>
(But now consider your own behaviour. Many of
you overturned the altars of the gods which had only
just been erected, and with difficulty did my
indulgent treatment teach you to keep quiet. And
when I sent away the body from Daphne,<note place='foot'>Babylas, Bishop of Antioch, had been buried in the grove
of Daphne, and the priests of Apollo retired from it. When
the church over his tomb was demolished by Julian he
removed the body of St. Babylas to Antioch, and that night
(October 22. 362 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>) the people of Antioch burned the
temple of Apollo which Julian had restored. Cf. Johannes
Chrysostomos, <hi rend='italic'>De S. Babyla et contra Julianum</hi>; and
Libanius, <hi rend='italic'>Monody on the Temple of Apollo at Daphne</hi>.</note> some of
you, in expiation of your conduct towards the gods,
handed over the shrine of the god of Daphne to
those who were aggrieved about the relics of the
body, and the rest of you, whether by accident
or on purpose, hurled against the shrine that
fire which made the strangers who were visiting
your city shudder, but gave pleasure to the mass of
your citizens and was ignored and is still ignored
by your Senate. Now, in my opinion, even before
that fire the god had forsaken the temple, for when
I first entered it his holy image gave me a sign
thereof. I call mighty Helios to bear me witness of
this before all unbelievers. And now I wish to
remind you of yet another reason for your hatred of
me, and then to abuse myself&mdash;a thing which I
usually do fairly well&mdash;and both to accuse and blame
myself with regard to that hatred.)
</p>

<p>
Δεκάτῳ γάρ που μηνὶ τῷ παρ᾽ ὑμῖν ἀριθμουμένῳ·
Λῶον οἶμαι τοῦτον ὑμεῖς προσαγορεύετε·
τοῦ θεοῦ τούτου πάτριός ἐστιν ἑορτή, καὶ ἔδει
σπουδῇ πρὸς τὴν Δάφνην ἀπαντᾶν. ἐγὼ μὲν οὖν
ἀπὸ τοῦ Κασίου Διὸς ἐπὶ τοῦτο ἔδραμον, οἰόπμενος
ἐνταῦθα μάλιστα τοῦ πλούτου καὶ τῆς φιλοτιμίας
ὑμῶν ἀπολαύσειν. εἶτα ἀνέπλαττον παρ᾽
ἐμαυτῷ πομπήν, [362] ὥσπερ ὀνείρατα ὁρῶν, ἱερεῖα καὶ
σπονδὰς καὶ χοροὺς τῷ θεῷ καὶ θυμιάματα καὶ
τοὺς ἐφήβους ἐκεῖ περὶ τὸ τέμενος θεοπρεπέστατα
μὲν τὰς ψυχὰς κατεσκευασμένους, λευκῇ δ᾽ ἐσθῆτι
καὶ μεγαλοπρεπεῖ κεκοσμημένους. ὡς δὲ εἴσω
παρῆλθον τοῦ τεμένους, οὔτε θυμιάματα κατέλαβον
οὔτε πόπανον οὔτε ἱερεῖον. αὐτίκα μὲν
οὖν ἐθαύμασα καὶ ᾤμην ἔξω τοῦ τεμένους εἶναι,
περιμένειν δ᾽ ὑμᾶς, [B] ἐμὲ δὴ τιμῶντας ὡς ἀρχιερέα,
τὸ σύνθημα παρ᾽ ἐμοῦ. ἐπεὶ δὲ ἠρόμην, τί μέλλει
θύειν ἡ πόλις ἐνιαύσιον ἑορτὴν ἄγουσα τῷ θεῷ, ὁ
<pb n='488'/><anchor id='Pg488'/><anchor id='Pg489'/>
ἱερεὺς εἶπεν· ἐγὼ μὲν ἥκω φέρων οἴκοθεν τῷ θεῷ
χῆνα ἱερεῖον, ἡ πόλις δὲ τὰ νῦν οὐδὲν ηὐτέεπισται.
</p>

<p>
(In the tenth month, according to your reckoning,&mdash;Loos
I think you call it&mdash;there is a festival founded
by your forefathers in honour of this god, and it was
your duty to be zealous in visiting Daphne. Accordingly
I hastened thither from the temple of Zeus
Kasios,<note place='foot'>Kasios was the name of a mountain near Antioch where
there was a temple of Zeus.</note> thinking that at Daphne, if anywhere, I
should enjoy the sight of your wealth and public
spirit. And I imagined in my own mind the sort of
procession it would be, like a man seeing visions in a
dream, beasts for sacrifice, libations, choruses in
honour of the god, incense, and the youths of your
city there surrounding the shrine, their souls adorned
with all holiness and themselves attired in white and
splendid raiment. But when I entered the shrine I
found there no incense, not so much as a cake, not a
single beast for sacrifice. For the moment I was
amazed and thought that I was still outside the
shrine and that you were waiting the signal from me,
doing me that honour because I am supreme pontiff.
But when I began to inquire what sacrifice the city
intended to offer to celebrate the annual festival in
honour of the god, the priest answered, <q>I have
brought with me from my own house a goose as an
offering to the god, but the city this time has made
no preparations.</q>)
</p>

<p>
Ἐνταῦθα ὁ φιλαπεχθήμων ἐγὼ πρὸς τὴν βουλὴν
ἀνεπιεικεῖς πάνυ διελέχθην λόγους, ὧν ἴσως
οὐκ ἄτοπον καὶ νῦν μνημονεῦσαι. <q>Δεινόν,</q>
ἔφην ἐγώ, <q>τὴν τοσαύτην πόλιν οὕτω τῶν θεῶν
ὀλιγώρως ἔχειν, ὡς οὐδεμία παροικοῦσα ταῖς
ἐσχατιαῖς τοῦ Πόντου κώμη· [C] μυρίους κλήρους
γῆς ἰδίας κεκτημένη, τῷ πατρίῳ θεῷ νῦν πρῶτον
ἐπιστάσης ἑορτῆς ἐνιαυσίου, ἐπειδὴ διεσκέδασαν
οἱ θεοὶ τῆς ἀθεότητος τὴν νεφέλην, μίαν ὄρνιν<note place='foot'>μίαν ὄρνιν Hertlein suggests, ὄρνιν MSS.</note>
ὑπὲρ αὑτῆς οὐ προσάγει, ἣν ἐχρῆν μάλιστα μὲν
καὶ κατὰ φυλὰς βουθυτεῖν, εἰ δὲ μὴ ῥᾴδιον, ἕνα
γε<note place='foot'>ἕνα γε Hertlein suggests, ἕνα MSS.</note> κοινῇ πᾶσαν ὑπὲρ αὑτῆς προσφέρειν τῷ θεῷ
ταῦρον. [D] ὑμῶν δ᾽ ἕκαστος ἰδίᾳ μὲν εἰς τὰ δεῖπνα
καὶ τὰς ἑορτὰς χαίρει δαπανώμενος, καὶ εὖ οἶδα
πολλοὺς ὑμῶν πλεῖστα εἰς τὰ δεῖπνα τοῦ Μαϊουμᾶ
χρήματα ἀπολέσαντας, ὑπὲρ δ᾽ ὑμῶν αὐτῶν
καὶ τῆς σωτηρίας τῆς πόλεως οὐδεὶς θύει οὔτε
ἰδίᾳ τῶν πολιτῶν οὔτε ἡ πόλις κοινῇ, μόνος δ᾽ ὁ
ἱερεύς, ὃν οἶμαι δικαιότερον ἦν ἀπὸ τοῦ πλήθους
τῶν προσφερομένων τῷ θεῷ παρ᾽ ὑμῶν οἴκαδε
ἀπιέναι μερίδας ἔχοντα. τοῖς μὲν γὰρ ἱερεῦσιν
οἱ θεοὶ καλοκἀγαθίᾳ τιμᾶν αὑτοὺς καὶ ἀρετῆς
ἐπιτηδεύσει προσέταξαν καὶ λειτουργεῖν σφίσι τὰ
εἰκότα· [363] πρέπει δ᾽ οἶμαι τῇ πόλει θύειν ἰδίᾳ καὶ
<pb n='490'/><anchor id='Pg490'/><anchor id='Pg491'/>
δημοσίᾳ· νυνὶ δὲ ὑμῶν ἕκαστος ἐπιτρέπει μὲν τῇ
γυναικὶ πάντα ἐκφέρειν ἔνδοθεν εἰς τοὺς Γαλιλαίους,
καὶ τρέφουσαι ἀπὸ τῶν ὑμετέρων ἐκεῖναι
τοὺς πένητας πολὺ τῆς ἀθεότητος ἐργάζονται
θαῦμα πρὸς τοὺς τῶν τοιούτων δεομένουςλ ἔστι δὲ
τοιοῦτον οἶμαι τὸ πλεῖστον τῶν ἀνθρώπων γένος·
ὑμεῖς δ᾽ αὐτοὶ πρῶτον μὲν τῶν εἰς τοὺς θεοὺς
τιμῶν ἀμελῶς ἔχοντες πράττειν οὐδὲν ἄτοπον
ὑπολαμβάνετε· [B] πρόσεισι δ᾽ οὐδεὶς τῶν δεομένων
τοῖς ἱεροῖς· οὐ γὰρ ἔστιν οἶμαι πόθεν διατραφῇ.
καὶ γενέθλια μέν τις ἑστιῶν ἱκανῶς παρασκευάζει
δεῖπνον καὶ ἄριστον, ἐπὶ πολυτελῆ τράπεζαν τοὺς
φίλους παραλαμβάνων· ἐνιαυσίου δ᾽ ἑορτῆς οὔσης
οὐδεὶς ἐκόμισεν ἔλαιον εἰς λύχνον τῷ θεῷ οὐδὲ
σπονδὴν οὐδ᾽ ἱερεῖον οὐδὲ λιβανωτόν. ἐγὼ μὲν
οὖν<note place='foot'>μὲν οὖν Hertlein suggests, μὲν MSS.</note> οὐκ οἶδα, ὅπως ἄν τις ταῦτα [C] ἀνὴρ ἀγαθὸς
ὁρῶν παρ᾽ ὑμῖν ἀποδέξαιτο, νομίζω δ᾽ ἔγωγε μηδὲ
τοῖς θεοῖς ἀρέσκειν.</q>
</p>

<p>
(Thereupon, being fond of making enemies, I made
in the Senate a very unseemly speech which perhaps
it may now be pertinent to quote to you. <q>It is a
terrible thing,</q> I said, <q>that so important a city
should be more neglectful of the gods than any
village on the borders of the Pontus.<note place='foot'>cf. Themistius 332 <hi rend='smallcaps'>d</hi>.</note> Your city
possesses ten thousand lots of land privately owned,
and yet when the annual festival in honour of the
god of her forefathers is to be celebrated for the first
time since the gods dispelled the cloud of atheism,
she does not produce on her own behalf a single bird,
though she ought if possible to have sacrificed an ox
for every tribe, or if that were too difficult, the whole
city in common ought at any rate to have offered to
the god one bull on her own behalf. Yet every one
of you delights to spend money privately on dinners
and feasts; and I know very well that many of you
squandered very large sums of money on dinners
during the May festival. Nevertheless, on your own
behalf and on behalf of the city's welfare not one of
the citizens offers a private sacrifice, nor does the city
offer a public sacrifice, but only this priest! Yet I
think that it would have been more just for him to
go home carrying portions from the multitude of
beasts offered by you to the god. For the duty
assigned by the gods to priests is to do them honour
by their nobility of character and by the practice of
virtue, and also to perform to them the service that
is due; but it befits the city, I think, to offer both
private and public sacrifice. But as it is, every one
of you allows his wife to carry everything out of
his house to the Galilaeans, and when your wives
feed the poor at your expense they inspire a great
admiration for godlessness in those who are in need
of such bounty&mdash;and of such sort are, I think, the
great majority of mankind,&mdash;while as for yourselves
you think that you are doing nothing out of the
way when in the first place you are careless of the
honours due to the gods, and not one of those in
need goes near the temples&mdash;for there is nothing
there, I think, to feed them with&mdash;and yet when any
one of you gives a birthday feast he provides a dinner
and a breakfast without stint and welcomes his
friends to a costly table; when, however, the annual
festival arrived no one furnished olive oil for a lamp
for the god, or a libation, or a beast for sacrifice, or
incense. Now I do not know how any good man
could endure to see such things in your city, and
for my part I am sure that it is displeasing to the
gods also.</q>)
</p>

<p>
Τοιαῦτα εἰπὼν τότε μέμνημαι, καὶ ὁ μὲν θεὸς
ἐμαρτύρησέ μου τοῖς λόγοις, ὡς μήποτε ὤφελεν,
ἐκλιπὼν τὸ προάστειον, ὃ πολὺν ἐτήρησε χρόνον,
ἐν ἐκείνῃ τῇ ζάλῃ τρέψας ἀλλαχοῦ τῶν κρατούντων
τὴν διάνοιαν καὶ τὼ χεῖρε βιασάμενος.
ὑμῖν δ᾽ ἀπηχθόμην ἐγὼ ποιῶν ἀνοήτως. ἐχρῆν
γὰρ σιωπᾶν, ὥσπερ οἶμαι πολλοὶ καὶ ἄλλοι τῶν
συνεισελθόντων ἐμοί, καὶ μὴ πολυπραγμονεῖν
μηδ᾽ ἐπιτιμᾶν. [D] ἀλλ᾽ ὑπὸ προπετείας ἐγὼ καὶ
<pb n='492'/><anchor id='Pg492'/><anchor id='Pg493'/>
τῆς καταγελάστου κολακείας· οὐ γὰρ δὴ νομιστέον
ὑπ᾽ εὐνοίας ἐμοὶ τότε εἰρῆσθαι τοὺς πρὸς
ὑμᾶς λόγους, ἀλλ᾽ οἶμαι δόξαν θηρεύων εὐλαβείας
τε εἰς τοὺς θεοὺς καὶ εἰς ὑμᾶς εὐνοίας ἀδόλου·
τοῦτο δ᾽ ἐστὶν οἶμαι παγγέλοιος κολακεία· πολλὰ
ὑμῶν μάτην κατέχεα. [364] δίκαια ποίνυν ἐργάζεσθέ
με τῶν ἐπιτιμήσεων ἐκείνων ἀμυνόμενοι καὶ
ἐναλλάττοντες τὰ χωρία. ἐγὼ μὲν ὑπὸ τῷ θεῷ
πρὸς τῷ βωμῷ καὶ τοῖς τοῦ ἀγάλματος ἴχνεσιν
ἐν ὀλίγοις ὑμῶν κατέδραμον· ὑμεῖς δ᾽ ἐπὶ τῆς
ἀγορᾶς ἐν τῷ δήμῳ διὰ τῶν ἱκανῶν τὰ τοιαῦτα
χαριεντίζεσθαι πολιτῶν. εὖ γὰρ ἴστε, πάντες
οἱ λέγοντες κοινοῦνται πρὸς τοὺς ἀκούοντας τοὺς
λόγους, καὶ ὁ ξὺν ἡδονῇ τῶν βλασφημιῶν ἀκροασάμενος,
μετέχων [B] τῆς ἴσης ἡδονῆς ἀπραγμονέστερον
τοῦ λέγοντος, κοινωνός ἐστι τῆς αἰτίας.
</p>

<p>
(This is what I remember to have said at the time,
and the god bore witness to the truth of my words&mdash;would
that he had not!&mdash;when he forsook your
suburb which for so long he had protected, and again
during that time of storm and stress<note place='foot'>Julian probably alludes to the riot which took place at
Antioch on account of the famine in 354, when the populace
killed Theophilus the Governor and were punished for the
murder by Constantius.</note> when he
turned in the wrong direction the minds of those
who were then in power and forced their hands.
But I acted foolishly in making myself odious to you.
For I ought to have remained silent as, I think, did
many of those who came here with me, and I ought
not to have been meddlesome or found fault. But
I poured down all these reproaches on your heads
to no purpose, owing to my headlong temper and a
ridiculous desire to flatter,&mdash;for it is surely not to be
believed that out of goodwill towards you I spoke
those words to you then; but I was, I think, hunting
after a reputation for piety towards the gods and for
sincere good-will towards you, which is, I think, the
most absurd form of flattery. Therefore you treat
me justly when you defend yourselves against those
criticisms of mine and choose a different place for
making your defence. For I abused you under the
god's statue near his altar and the footprints of the
holy image, in the presence of few witnesses; but you
abused me in the market-place, in the presence of
the whole populace, and with the help of citizens
who were capable of composing such pleasant
witticisms as yours. For you must be well aware
that all of you, those who uttered the sayings about
me and those who listened to them, are equally
responsible; and he who listened with pleasure to
those slanders, since he had an equal share of the
pleasure, though he took less trouble than the
speaker, must share the blame.)
</p>

<p>
Εἴρηται οὖν ὑμῖν δι᾽ ὅλης καὶ ἠκρόαται τῆς
πόλεως ὁπόσα εἰς τουτονὶ πέπαικται τὸν φαῦλον
πώγωνα καὶ τὸν οὐδὲν ἐπιδείξαντα ὑμῖν καλὸν
οὐδὲ ἐπιδείξοντα τρόπον. οὐ γὰρ ἐπιδείξει βίον
ὑμῖν, ὁποῖον ὑμεῖς ἀεὶ μὲν ζῆτε, ποθεῖτε δὲ ὁρᾶν
καὶ ἐν τοῖς ἄρχουσιν. ὑπὲρ μὲν δὴ τῶν βλασφημιῶν,
ἃς ἰδίᾳ [C] τε καὶ δημοσίᾳ κατεχέατέ μου
παίζοντες ἐν τοῖς ἀναπαίστοις, ἐμαυτοῦ προσκατηγορήσας
<pb n='494'/><anchor id='Pg494'/><anchor id='Pg495'/>
ὑμῖν ἐπιτρέπω χρῆσθαι μετὰ μείζονος
αὐτῷ παρρησίας, ὡς οὐδὲν ὑμᾶς ἐγὼ διὰ τοῦτο
πώποτε δεινὸν ἐργάσομαι σφάττων ἢ τύπτων
ἢ δῶν ἦ ἀποκλείων ἢ κολάζων. πῶς γάρ; ὅς,
ἐπείπερ ὑμῖν ἐμαυτὸν ἐπιδείξας μετὰ τῶν φίλων
σωφρονοῦντα, φαυλότατον ἐδεῖν ὑμῖν καὶ ἀηδέστατον,
οὐδὲν [D] ἐπέδειξα καλὸν θέαμα, μεταστῆναι
τῆς πόλεως<note place='foot'>τῆς πόλεως Hertlein suggests, τὴν πόλι</note> ἔγνωκα καὶ ὑποχωρῆσαι, πεπεισμένος
μὲν οὐδαμῶς, ὅτι πάντως ἐκείνοις ἀρέσω,
πρὸς οὓς πορεύομαι, κρίνων δ᾽ αἱρετώτερον, εἰ
διαμάρτοιμι τοῦ δόξαι γοῦν ἐκείνοις καλὸς κἀγαθός,
ἐν μέρει μεταδοῦναι πᾶσι τῆς ἀηδίας τῆς
ἐμαυτοῦ καὶ μὴ τὴν εὐδαίμονα ταύτην ἀποκναῖσαι
πόλιν ὥσπερ ὑπὸ δυσωδίας τῆς ἐμῆς μετριότητος
καὶ τῶν ἐμῶν ἐπιτηδείων τῆς σωφροσύνης.
</p>

<p>
(Throughout the whole city, then, you both uttered
and listened to all the jests that were made about
this miserable beard of mine, and about one who
has never displayed to you nor ever will display any
charm of manner. For he will never display among
you the sort of life that you always live and desire
to see also among those who govern you. Next
with respect to the slanders which both in private
and publicly you have poured down on my head,
when you ridiculed me in anapaestic verse, since I
too have accused myself I permit you to employ that
method with even greater frankness; for I shall
never on that account do you any harm, by slaying
or beating or fettering or imprisoning you or punishing
you in any way. Why indeed should I? For
now that in showing you myself, in company with
my friends, behaving with sobriety,&mdash;a most sorry
and unpleasing sight to you&mdash;I have failed to show
you any beautiful spectacle, I have decided to leave
this city and to retire from it; not indeed because I
am convinced that I shall be in all respects pleasing
to those to whom I am going, but because I judge it
more desirable, in case I should fail at least to seem
to them an honourable and good man, to give all
men in turn a share of my unpleasantness,<note place='foot'>Demosthenes, <hi rend='italic'>Against Meidias</hi> 153 ἀποκναίει γὰρ ἀηδίᾳ
καὶ ἀναισθησίᾳ.</note> and not
to annoy this happy city with the evil odour, as it
were, of my moderation and the sobriety of my
friends.)
</p>

<p>
[365] Ἡμῶν γὰρ οὐδεὶς ἀγρὸν οὐδὲ κῆπον ἐπρίατο
παρ᾽ ὑμῖν οὐδὲ οἰκίαν ᾠκοδόμησεν οὐδ᾽ ἔγημε
παρ᾽ ὑμῶν οὐδ᾽ ἐξέδωκεν εἰς ὑμᾶς οὐδὲ ἠράσθημεν
τῶν παρ᾽ ὑμῖν καλῶν, οὐδ᾽ ἐζηλώσαμεν Ἀσσύριον
πλοῦτον οὐδ᾽ ἐνειμάμεθα τὰς προστασίας οὐδὲ
παραδυναστεύειν ἡμῖν ἠνεσχόμεθά τινας τῶν ἐν
τέλει οὐδ᾽ ἐπείσαμεν τὸν δῆμον εἰς παρασκευὰς
δείπνων ἢ θεάτρων, ὃν οὕτως ἐποιήσαμεν τρυφᾶν,
ὥστε ἄγων σχολὴν [B] ἀπὸ τῆς ἐνδείας τοὺς ἀναπαίστους
εἰς τοὺς αἰτίους αὑτῷ τῆς εὐθηνίας
ξυνέθηκεν, οὐδ᾽ ἐπεγράψαμεν χρυσίον οὐδὲ ᾐτήσαμεν
ἀργύριον οὐδὲ ηὐξήσαμεν φόρους· ἀλλὰ
<pb n='496'/><anchor id='Pg496'/><anchor id='Pg497'/>
πρὸς τοῖς ἐλλείμμασιν ἀνεῖται πᾶσι τῶν εἰθισμένων
εἰσφορῶν τὸ πέμπτον. οὐκ οἶμαι δ᾽
ἐξαρκεῖν τὸ σωφρονεῖν ἐμέ, ἀλλὰ καὶ<note place='foot'>ἀλλὰ καὶ Reiske would add.</note> μέτριον
ἔχω ναὶ μὰ Δία καὶ θεούς, ὡς ἐμαυτὸν πείθω,
τὸν εἰσαγγελέα, καλῶς ὑφ᾽ ὑμῶν ἐπιτιμηθέντα,
διότι γέρων ὢν καὶ φαλακρὸς ἠρέμα τὰ πρόσω
διὰ δυστροπίαν [C] αἰσχύνεται κομᾶν ἐξόπισθεν,
ὥσπερ Ὅμηρος ἐποίησε τοὺς Ἄβαντας, οὐδὲν
δ᾽ ἐκείνου φαυλοτέρους ἄνδρας οἴκοι παρ᾽ ἐμαυτῷ
δύο καὶ τρεῖς, ἀλλὰ καὶ τέτταρας, εἰ βούλεσθε
δὲ νυνὶ καὶ πέμπτον.
</p>

<p>
(For not one of us has bought a field or garden in
your city or built a house or married or given in
marriage among you, or fallen in love with any of
your handsome youths, or coveted the wealth of
Assyria, or awarded court patronage;<note place='foot'>προστασία is sometimes used of the Imperial protection
of a municipal guild, and that may be Julian's meaning here.</note> nor have we
allowed any of those in office to exercise influence
over us, or induced the populace to get up banquets
or theatrical shows; nay rather we have procured for
them such luxurious ease that, since they have respite
from want, they have had leisure to compose their
anapaests against the very author of their well-being.
Again, I have not levied gold money or demanded
silver money or increased the tribute; but in
addition to the arrears, one-fifth of the regular
taxes has been in all cases remitted. Moreover I
do not think it enough that I myself practise self-restraint,
but I have also an usher who, by Zeus and
the other gods, is moderate indeed, as I believe,
though he has been finely scolded by you, because,
being an old man and slightly bald in front, in his
perversity he is too modest to wear his hair long
behind, as Homer made the Abantes wear theirs.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Iliad</hi> 2. 542.</note>
And I have with me at my court two or three men
also who are not at all inferior to him, nay four or
even five now, if you please.)
</p>

<p>
Ὁ δέ μοι θεῖος καὶ ὁμώνυμος οὐ δικαιότατα
μὲν ὑμῶν προύστη, μέχρις ἐπέτρεπον οἱ θεοὶ
ξυνεῖναι ἡμῖν αὐτὸν καὶ ξυμπράττειν; οὐ προμηθέστατα
δὲ πάσαις ἐπεξῆλθε ταῖς οἰκονομίαις
τῆς πόλεως; ἡμῖν μὲν οὖν ἐδόκει ταῦτα καλά,
πρᾳότης ἀρχόντων μετὰ σωφροσύνης, [D] ᾠόμεθά τε
ὑμῖν ἱκανῶς διὰ τούτων καλοὶ φανεῖσθαι τῶν
ἐπιτηδευμάτων. ἐπεὶ δὲ ὑμᾶς ἥ τε βαθύτης
ἀπαρέσκει τοῦ γενείου καὶ τὸ ἀτημέλητον τῶν
τριχῶν καὶ τὸ μὴ παραβάλλειν τοῖς θεάτροις
καὶ τὸ ἀξιοῦν ἐν τοῖς ἱεροῖς εἶναι σεμνοὺς καὶ
πρὸ τούτων ἁπάντων ἡ περὶ τὰς κρίσεις ἡμῶν
ἀσχολία καὶ τὸ τῆς ἀγορᾶς εἴργειν τὴν πλεονεξίαν,
[366] ἑκόντες ὑμῖν ἐξιστάμεθα τῆς πόλεως.
οὐ γὰρ οἶμαι ῥᾴδιον ἐν γήρᾳ μεταθεμένῳ διαφυγεῖν
τὸν λεγόμενον ὑπὲρ τοῦ ἰκτῖνος μῦθον.
λέγεται γάρ τοι τὸν ἰκτῖνα φωνὴν ἔχοντα παραπλησίαν
τοῖς ἄλλοις ὄρνισιν ἐπιθέσθαι τῷ χρεμετίζειν,
ὥσπερ οἱ γενναῖοι τῶν ἵππων, εἶτα τοῦ
<pb n='498'/><anchor id='Pg498'/><anchor id='Pg499'/>
μὲν ἐπιλαθόμενον, τὸ δὲ οὐ δυνηθέντα ἑλεῖν
ἱκανῶς ἀμφοῖν στέρεσθαι καὶ φαυλοτέραν τῶν
ἄλλων ὀρνίθων εἶναι τὴν φωνήν. [B] ὃ δὴ καὶ
αὐτὸς εὐλαβοῦμαι παθεῖν, ἀγροικίας τε ἅμα καὶ
δεξιότητος ἁμαρτεῖν. ἤδη γάρ, ὡς καὶ ὑμεῖς αὐτοὶ
συνορᾶτε, πλησίον ἐσμὲν ἐθελόντων θεῶν,
</p>

<p>
(And as for my uncle and namesake,<note place='foot'>Julian, Count of the East.</note> did he not
govern you most justly, so long as the gods allowed
him to remain with me and to assist me in my work?
Did he not with the utmost foresight administer all
the business of the city? For my part I thought these
were admirable things, I mean mildness and moderation
in those who govern, and I supposed that by practising
these I should appear admirable in your eyes.
But since the length of my beard is displeasing to
you, and my unkempt locks, and the fact that I do
not put in an appearance at the theatres and that I
require men to be reverent in the temples; and
since more than all these things my constant attendance
at trials displeases you and the fact that I try
to banish greed of gain from the market-place, I
willingly go away and leave your city to you. For
when a man changes his habits in his old age it is
not easy, I think, for him to escape the fate that is
described in the legend about the kite. The story
goes that the kite once had a note like that of other
birds, but it aimed at neighing like a high-spirited
horse; then since it forgot its former note and could
not quite attain to the other sound, it was deprived
of both, and hence the note it now utters is less
musical than that of any other bird. This then is
the fate that I am trying to avoid, I mean failing
to be either really boorish or really accomplished.
For already, as you can see for yourselves, I am,
since Heaven so wills, near the age)
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<lg>
<l>Εὖτέ μοι λευκαὶ μελαίνοις ἀναμεμίξονται τρίχες,</l>
</lg>

<p>
(<q>When on my
head white hairs mingle with black,</q>)
</p>

</quote>

<p>
ὁ Τήιος ἔφη ποιητής.
</p>

<p>
(as the poet of
Teos said.<note place='foot'>Anacreon <hi rend='italic'>fr.</hi> 77, Bergk.</note>)
</p>

<p>
Εἶεν. ἀλλὰ τῆς ἀχαριστίας, πρὸς θεῶν καὶ
Διὸς ἀγοραίου καὶ πολιούχου, ὑπόσχετε λόγον.
ἠδίκησθέ τι παρ᾽ ἐμοῦ κοινῇ πώποτε ἢ καὶ<note place='foot'>ἢ καὶ Hertlein suggests, καὶ MSS.</note> ἰδίᾳ,
[C] καὶ δίκην ὑπὲρ τούτου λαβεῖν οὐ δυνάμενοι
φανερῶς διὰ τῶν ἀναπαίστων ἡμᾶς, ὥσπερ οἱ
κωμῳδοὶ τὸν Ἡρακλέα καὶ τὸν Διόνυσον ἕλκουσι
καὶ περιφέρουσιν, οὕτω δὲ καὶ ὑμεῖς ἐν ταῖς ἀγοραῖς
ἐπιτρίβετε λοιδοροῦντες; ἢ τοῦ μὲν ποιεῖν τι
χαλεπὸν εἰς ὑμᾶς ἀπεσχόμην, τοῦ λέγειν δὲ ὑμᾶς
κακῶς οὐκ ἀπεσχόμην, ἵνα με καὶ ὑμεῖς διὰ τῶν
αὐτῶν ἰόντες ἀμύνησθε; τίς οὖν ὑμῖν ἐστιν αἰτία
τοῦ πρὸς ἡμᾶς προσκρούσματος καὶ τῆς ἀπεχθείας;
ἐγὼ γὰρ εὖ οἶδα δεινὸν [D] οὐδένα ὑμῶν οὐδὲν
οὐδὲ ἀνήκεστον ἐργασάμενος οὔτε ἰδίᾳ τοὺς ἄνδρας
οὔτε κοινῇ τὴν πόλιν, οὐδ᾽ εἰπὼν οὐδὲν φλαῦρον,
ἀλλὰ καὶ ἐπαινέσας, ὡς ἔδοξέ μοι προσήκειν, καὶ
μεταδοὺς χρηστοῦ τινος, ὅσον εἰκὸς ἦν τὸν ἐπιθυμοῦντα
μετὰ τοῦ δυνατοῦ πολλοὺς εὖ ποιεῖν
ἀνθρώπους. ἀδύνατον δ᾽ εὖ ἴστε καὶ τοῖς εἰσφέρουσι
<pb n='500'/><anchor id='Pg500'/><anchor id='Pg501'/>
συγχωρεῖν ἅπαντα [367] καὶ διδόναι πάντα τοῖς
εἰωθόσι λαμβάνειν. ὅταν οὖν φανῶ μηδὲν ἐλαττώσας
τῶν δημοσίων συντάξεων, ὅσας εἴωθεν ἡ
βασιλικὴ νέμειν δαπάνη, ὑμῖν δ᾽ ἀνεὶς τῶν εἰσφορῶν
οὐκ ὀλίγα, ἆρ᾽ οὐκ αἰνύγματι τὸ πρᾶγμα
ἔοικεν;
</p>

<p>
(Enough of that. But now, in the name of Zeus,
God of the Market-place and Guardian of the City,
render me account of your ingratitude. Were you
ever wronged by me in any way, either all in common
or as individuals, and is it because you were unable
to avenge yourselves openly that you now assail me
with abuse in your market-places in anapaestic verse,
just as comedians drag Heracles and Dionysus on
the stage and make a public show of them?<note place='foot'>cf. <hi rend='italic'>Oration</hi> 7. 204 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b</hi>.</note> Or can
you say that, though I refrained from any harsh
conduct towards you, I did not refrain from speaking
ill of you, so that you, in your turn, are defending
yourselves by the same methods? What, I ask, is
the reason of your antagonism and your hatred of
me? For I am very sure that I had done no terrible
or incurable injury to any one of you, either separately,
as individuals, or to your city as a whole; nor
had I uttered any disparaging word, but I had even
praised you, as I thought I was bound to do, and
had bestowed on you certain advantages, as was
natural for one who desires, as far as he can, to
benefit many men. But it is impossible, as you know
well, both to remit all their taxes to the taxpayers
and to give everything to those who are accustomed
to receive gifts. Therefore when it is seen that
I have diminished none of the public subscriptions
which the imperial purse is accustomed to contribute,
but have remitted not a few of your taxes,
does not this business seem like a riddle?)
</p>

<p>
Ἀλλ᾽ ὁπόσα μὲν κοινῇ πρὸς πάντας πεποίηται
τοὺς ἀρχομένους ὑπ᾽ ἐμοῦ, πρέποι ἂν σιωπᾶν, ἵνα
μὴ δοκοίην ὥσπερ [B] ἐξεπίτηδες αὐτοπρόσωπος ἐπαίνους
ᾄδειν ἐμαυτοῦ, καὶ ταῦτα ἐπαγγειλάμενος
πολλὰς καὶ ἀσελγεστάτας ὕβρεις καταχέαι· τὰ
δὲ ἰδίᾳ μοι πρὸς ὑμᾶς πεποιημένα προπετῶς μὲν
καὶ ἀνοήτως, ἥκιστα δὲ ὑφ᾽ ὑμῶν ἄξια ἀχαριστεῖσθαι,
πρέποι ἂν οἶμαι προφέρειν ὥσπερ τινὰ
ἐμὰ ὀνείδη τοσούτῳ τῶν ἔμπροσθεν χαλεπώτερα,
τοῦ τε αὐχμοῦ τοῦ περὶ τὸ πρόσωπον καὶ τῆς
ἀναφροδισίας, ὅσῳ καὶ ἀληθέστερα ὄντα τῇ ψυχῇ
μάλιστα προσήκει. [C] καὶ δὴ πρότερον ἐπῄνουν
ὑμᾶς ὡς ἐνεδέχετό μοι φιλοτίμως οὐκ ἀναμείνας
τὴν πεῖραν οὐδ᾽ ὅπως ἕξομεν πρὸς ἀλλήλους
ἐνθυμηθείς, ἀλλὰ νομίσας ὑμᾶς μὲν Ἑλλήνων
παῖδας, ἐμαυτὸν δέ, εἰ καὶ γένος ἐστί μοι Θρᾴκιον,
Ἕλληνα τοῖς ἐπιτηδεύμασιν ὑπελάμβανον, ὅτι
μάλιστα ἀλλήλους ἀγαπήσομεν. ἓν μὲν δὴ τοῦτο
ἔστω μοι τῆς προπετείας ὄνειδος. ἔπειτα πρεσβευσαμένοις
ὑμῖν παρ᾽ ἐμὲ καὶ ἀφικομένοις ὑστέροις
οὐ τῶν ἄλλων μόνον, [D] ἀλλὰ καὶ Ἀλεξανδρέων
<pb n='502'/><anchor id='Pg502'/><anchor id='Pg503'/>
τῶν ἐπ᾽ Αἰγύπτῳ, πολὺ μὲν ἀνῆκα χρυσύον, πολὺ
δ᾽ ἀργύριον, φόρους δὲ παμπληθεῖς ἰδίᾳ παρὰ τὰς
ἄλλας πόλεις, ἔπειτα τοῦ βουλευτηρίου τὸν κατάλογον
διακοσίοις βουλευταῖς ἀνεπλήρωσα φεισάμενος
οὐδενός. ἐσκόπουν γὰρ ὅπως ἡ πόλις
ὑμῶν ἔσται μείζων καὶ δυνατωτέρα.
</p>

<p>
(However, it becomes me to be silent about all
that I have done for all my subjects in common, lest
it should seem that I am purposely as it were singing
my praises with my own lips, and that too after
announcing that I should pour down on my own head
many most opprobrious insults. But as for my actions
with respect to you as individuals, which, though the
manner of them was rash and foolish, nevertheless
did not by any means deserve to be repaid by you
with ingratitude, it would, I think, be becoming for
me to bring them forward as reproaches against
myself; and these reproaches ought to be more
severe than those I uttered before, I mean those
that related to my unkempt appearance and my lack
of charm, inasmuch as they are more genuine since
they have especial reference to the soul. I mean
that before I came here I used to praise you in the
strongest possible terms, without waiting to have
actual experience of you, nor did I consider how we
should feel towards one another; nay, since I
thought that you were sons of Greeks, and I myself,
though my family is Thracian, am a Greek in my
habits, I supposed that we should regard one
another with the greatest possible affection. This
example of my rashness must therefore be counted
as one reproach against me. Next, after you had
sent an embassy to me&mdash;and it arrived not only later
than all the other embassies, but even later than
that of the Alexandrians who dwell in Egypt,&mdash;I
remitted large sums of gold and of silver also, and
all the tribute money for you separately apart from
the other cities; and moreover I increased the
register of your Senate by two hundred members
and spared no man;<note place='foot'>The Senatorship was an expensive burden.</note> for I was planning to make
your city greater and more powerful.)
</p>

<p>
Δέδωκα οὖν ὑμῖν καὶ ἀπὸ τῶν ἐπιτροπευσάντων
τοὺς θησαυροὺς τοὺς ἐμοὺς [368] καὶ ἀπὸ τῶν ἐργασαμένων
τὸ νόμισμα τοὺς πλουσιωτάτους ἑλομένοις
ἔχειν· ὑμεῖς δ᾽ ἐκείνων μεν οὐ τοὺς δυναμένους
εἵλεσθε, λαβόμενοι δὲ τῆς ἀφορμῆς εἰργάσασθε
παραπλήσια πόλει μὲν οὐδαμῶς εὐνομουμένῃ,
πρέποντα δ᾽ ὑμῶν ἄλλως τῷ τρόπῳ. βούλεσθε
ἑνὸς ὑμᾶς ὑπομνήσω; βουλευτὴν ὀνομάσαντες,
πρὶν προσγραφῆναι τῷ καταλόγῳ, μετεώρου τῆς
δίκης οὔσης, ὑπεβάλετε λειτουργίᾳ τὸν ἄνθρωπον.
ἄλλον ἀπ᾽ ἀγορᾶς [B] εἱλκύσατε πένητα καὶ ἐκ τῶν
ἁπανταχοῦ μὲν ἀπολελειμμένων, παρ᾽ ὑμῖν δὲ διὰ
περιττὴν φρόνησιν ἀμειβομένων πρὸς χρυσίον
συρφετῶν εὐποροῦντα μετρίας οὐσίας εἵλεσθε
κοινωνόν. πολλὰ τοιαῦτα περὶ τὰς ὀνομασίας
κακουργούντων ὑμῶν, ἐπειδὴ μὴ πρὸς ἅπαντα
συνεχωρήσαμεν, ὧν τε εὖ εἰργασάμεθα τὴν χάριν
ἀπεστερήθημεν, καὶ ὧν ἀπεσχόμεθα ξὺν δίκῃ παρ᾽
ὑμῶν δυσχεραινόμεθα.
</p>

<p>
(I therefore gave you the opportunity to elect and
to have in your Senate the richest men among those
who administer my own revenues and have charge of
coining the currency. You however did not elect
the capable men among these, but you seized the
opportunity to act like a city by no means well-ordered,
though quite in keeping with your character.
Would you like me to remind you of a single instance?
You nominated a Senator, and then before his name
had been placed on the register, and the scrutiny of
his character was still pending, you thrust this
person into the public service. Then you dragged
in another from the market-place, a man who was
poor and who belonged to a class which in every
other city is counted as the very dregs, but who
among you, since of your excessive wisdom you
exchange rubbish for gold, enjoys a moderate
fortune; and this man you elected as your colleague.
Many such offences did you commit with regard
to the nominations, and then when I did not
consent to everything, not only was I deprived of
the thanks due for all the good I had done, but
also I have incurred your dislike on account of all
that I in justice refrained from.)
</p>

<p>
[C] Καὶ ταῦτα μὲν ἦν τῶν μικρῶν πάνυ καὶ οὔπω
δυνάμενα τὴν πόλιν ἐκπολεμῶσαι· τὸ δὲ δὴ
<pb n='504'/><anchor id='Pg504'/><anchor id='Pg505'/>
μέγιστον, ἐξ οὗ τὸ μέγα ἤρθη μῖσος, ἀφικομένου
μου πρὸς ὑμᾶς ὁ δῆμος ἐν τῷ θεάτρῳ, πνιγόμενος
ὑπὸ τῶν πλουσίων, ἀφῆκε φωνὴν πρῶτον ταύτην·
<q>Πάντα γέμει, πάντα πολλοῦ.</q> τῆς ἐπιούσης
διελέχθην ἐγὼ τοῖς δυνατοῖς ὑμῶν ἐπιχειρῶν
πείθειν, [D] ὅτι κρεῖττόν ἐστιν ὑπεριδόντας ἀδίκου
κτήσεως εὖ ποιῆσαι πολίτας καὶ ξένους. οἱ δὲ
ἐπαγγειλάμενοι τοῦ πράγματος ἐπιμελήσεσθαι
μηνῶν ἑξῆς τριῶν ὑπεριδόντος μου καὶ περιμείναντος
οὕτως ὀλιγῶρως εἶχον τοῦ πράγματος, ὡς
οὐδεὶς ἂν ἤλπισεν. ἐπεὶ δ᾽ ἑώρων ἀληθῆ τὴν τοῦ
δήμου φωνὴν καὶ τὴν ἀγορὰν οὐχ ὑπ᾽ ἐνδείας, ἀλλ᾽
ὑπ᾽ ἀπληστίας [369] τῶν κεκτημένων στενοχωρουμένην,
ἕταξα μέτριον ἑκάστου τίμημα καὶ δῆλον ἐποίησα
πᾶσιν. ἐπεὶ δ᾽ ἦν τὰ μὲν ἄλλα παρ᾽ αὐτοῖς πολλὰ
πάνυ· καὶ γὰρ ἦν οἶνος καὶ ἔλαιον καὶ τὰ λοιπὰ
πάντα· σίτου δ᾽ ἐνδεῶς εἶχον, ἀφορίας δεινῆς
ὑπὸ τῶν ἔμπροσθεν αὐχμῶν γενομένης, ἔδοξέ μοι
πέμπειν εἰς Χαλκίδα καὶ Ἱερὰν πόλιν καὶ πόλεις
τὰς πέριξ, ἔνθεν εἰσήγαγον ὑμῖν μέτρων τετταράκοντα
μυριάδας. ὡς δ᾽ ἀνάλωτο καὶ τοῦτο,
πρότερον μὲν πεντάκις χιλίους, [B] ἑπτάκις χιλίους δ᾽
ὕστερον, εἶτα νῦν μυρίους, οὓς ἐπιχώριόν ἐστι
λοιπὸν ὀνομάζειν μοδίους, ἀνάλισκον σίτου, πάντας
οἴκοθεν ἔχων. ἀπὸ τῆς Αἰγύπτου κομισθέντα
μοι σῖτον ἔδωκα τῇ πόλει, πραττόμενος ἀργύριον
οὐκ ἐπὶ δέκα μέτρων,<note place='foot'>οὐκ ἐπὶ&mdash;μέτρων Hertlein suggests, οὐ κατὰ&mdash;μέτρα MSS.</note> ἀλλὰ πεντεκαίδεκα τοσοῦτον,
<pb n='506'/><anchor id='Pg506'/><anchor id='Pg507'/>
ὅσον ἐπὶ τῶν δέκα πρότερον. εἰ δὲ
τοσαῦτα μέτρα θέρους ἦν παρ᾽ ὑμῖν τοῦ νομίσματος,
τί προσδοκᾶν ἔδει τηνικαῦτα, ἡνίκα, φησὶν ὁ
Βοιώτιος ποιητής, [C] χαλεπὸν γενέσθαι τὸν λιμὸν
ἐπὶ δώματι; ἆρ᾽ οὐ πέντε μόγις καὶ ἀγαπητῶς
ἄλλως τε καὶ τηλικούτου χειμῶνος ἐπιγενομένου;
</p>

<p>
(Now these were very trivial matters and could not
so far make the city hostile to me. But my greatest
offence of all, and what aroused that violent hatred of
yours, was the following. When I arrived among
you the populace in the theatre, who were being
oppressed by the rich, first of all cried aloud, <q>Everything
plentiful; everything dear!</q> On the following
day I had an interview with your powerful
citizens and tried to persuade them that it is
better to despise unjust profits and to benefit the
citizens and the strangers in your city. And they
promised to take charge of the matter, but though
for three successive months I took no notice and
waited, they neglected the matter in a way that no
one would have thought possible. And when I saw
that there was truth in the outcry of the populace,
and that the pressure in the market was due not to
any scarcity but to the insatiate greed of the rich, I
appointed a fair price for everything, and made it
known to all men. And since the citizens had
everything else in great abundance, wine, for instance,
and olive oil and all the rest, but were short
of corn, because there had been a terrible failure
of the crops owing to the previous droughts, I
decided to send to Chalcis and Hierapolis and the
cities round about, and from them I imported for
you four hundred thousand measures of corn. And
when this too had been used, I first expended five
thousand, then later seven thousand, and now again
ten thousand bushels&mdash;<q>modii</q><note place='foot'>The modius was a bushel measure.</note> as they are called
in my country&mdash;all of which was my very own
property; moreover I gave to the city corn which had
been brought for me from Egypt; and the price
which I set on it was a silver piece, not for ten
measures but for fifteen, that is to say, the same
amount that had formerly been paid for ten measures.
And if in summer, in your city, that same number of
measures is sold for that sum, what could you
reasonably have expected at the season when, as the
Boeotian poet says, <q>It is a cruel thing for famine to
be in the house.</q><note place='foot'>This does not occur in Hesiod or Pindar.</note> Would you not have been
thankful to get five measures for that sum, especially
when the winter had set in so severe?)
</p>

<p>
Τί οὖν ὑμῶν οἱ πλούσιοι; τὸν μὲν ἐπὶ
τῶν ἀγρῶν σίτον λάθρᾳ ἀπέδοντο πλείονος,
ἐβάρησαν δὲ τὸ κοινὸν τοῖς ἰδίοις ἀναλώμασι·
καὶ οὐχ ἡ πόλις μόνον ἐπὶ τοῦτο συρρεῖ, [D] οἱ
πλεῖστοι δὲ καὶ ἐκ τῶν ἀγρῶν συντρέχουσιν,
ὃ μόνον ἐστὶν εὑρεῖν πολὺ καὶ εὔωνον, ἄρτους
ὠνούμενοι. καίτοι τίς μέμνηται παρ᾽ ὑμῖν εὐθηνουμένης
τῆς πόλεως πεντεκαίδεκα μέτρα σίτου
πραθέντα τοῦ χρυσοῦ; ταύτης ἕνεκεν ὑμῖν ἀπηχθόμην
ἐγὼ τῆς πράξεως, ὅτι τὸν οἶνον ὑμῖν
οὐκ ἐπέτρεψα καὶ τὰ λάχανα καὶ τὰς ὀπώρας
ἀποδόσθαι χρυσοῦ, καὶ τὸν ὑπὸ τῶν πλουσίων
ἀποκεκλεισμένον ἐν ταῖς ἀποθήκαις σῖτον ἄργυρον
αὐτοῖς [370] καὶ χρυσὸν ἐξαίφνης παρ᾽ ὑμῶν γενέσθαι.
ἐκεῖνοι μὲν γὰρ αὐτὸν ἔξω τῆς πόλεως διέθεντο
καλῶς, ἐργασάμενοι τοῖς ἀνθρώποις λιμὸν ἀλοιητῆρα
βρότειον, ὡς ὁ θεὸς ἔφη τοὺς ταῦτα ἐπιτηδεύοντας
ἐξελέγχων. ἡ πόλις δ᾽ ἐν ἀφθονίᾳ
γέγονεν ἄρτων ἕνεκα μόνον, ἄλλου δ᾽ οὐδενός.
</p>

<p>
(But what did your rich men do? They secretly
sold the corn in the country for an exaggerated
price, and they oppressed the community by the
expenses that private persons had to incur. And
the result is that not only the city but most
of the country people too are flocking in to buy
bread, which is the only thing to be found in
abundance and cheap. And indeed who remembers
fifteen measures of corn to have been sold
among you for a gold piece, even when the city
was in a prosperous condition? It was for this conduct
that I incurred your hatred, because I did not
allow people to sell you wine and vegetables and
fruit for gold, or the corn which had been locked
away by the rich in their granaries to be suddenly
converted by you into silver and gold for their benefit.
For they managed the business finely outside
the city, and so procured for men <q>famine that
grinds down mortals,</q><note place='foot'>A phrase from an unknown oracular source.</note> as the god said when he was
accusing those who behave in this fashion. And the
city now enjoys plenty only as regards bread, and
nothing else.)
</p>

<p>
[B] Συνίην μὲν οὖν καὶ τότε ταῦτα ποιῶν ὅτι μὴ
πᾶσιν ἀρέσοιμι, πλὴν ἔμελεν οὐδὲν ἐμοί· τῷ γὰρ
<pb n='508'/><anchor id='Pg508'/><anchor id='Pg509'/>
ἀδικουμένῳ πλήθει βοηθεῖν ᾤμην χρῆναι καὶ
τοῖς ἀφικνουμένοις ξένοις, ἐμοῦ τε ἕνεκα καὶ τῶν
συνόντων ἡμῖν ἀρχόντων. ἐπεὶ δ᾽ οἶμαι συμβαίνει
τοὺς μὲν ἀπιέναι, τὴν πόλιν δ᾽ εἶναι τὰ πρὸς
ἐμὲ γνώμης μιᾶς· οἱ μὲν γὰρ μισοῦσιν, οἱ δ᾽ ὑπ᾽
ἐμοῦ τραφέντες ἀχαριστοῦσιν· Ἀδραστείᾳ πάντα
ἐπιτρέψας ἐς ἄλλο ἔθνος οἰχήσομαι καὶ δῆμον ἕτερον,
οὐδὲν ὑμᾶς ὑπομνήσας [C] ὧν ἐνιαυτοῖς ἔμπροσθεν
ἐννέα δίκαια δρῶντες εἰς ἀλλήλους εἰργάσασθε,
φέρων μὲν ὁ δῆμος ἐπὶ τὰς οἰκίας τῶν δυνατῶν
ξὺν βοῇ τὴν φλόγα καὶ ἀποκτιννὺς τὸν ἄρχοντα,
δίκην δ᾽ αὖθις ἀποτίνων ὑπὲρ τούτων, ὧν ὀργιζόμενος
δικαίως ἔπραξεν οὐκέτι μετρίως.
</p>

<p>
(Now I knew even then when I acted thus that I
should not please everybody, only I cared nothing
about that. For I thought it was my duty to assist
the mass of the people who were being wronged, and
the strangers who kept arriving in the city both on my
account and on account of the high officials who were
with me. But since it is now, I think, the case that
the latter have departed, and the city is of one mind
with respect to me&mdash;for some of you hate me and
the others whom I fed are ungrateful&mdash;I leave the
whole matter in the hands of Adrasteia<note place='foot'>The avenging goddess who is more familiarly known as
Nemesis.</note> and I will
betake myself to some other nation and to citizens of
another sort. Nor will I even remind you how you
treated one another when you asserted your rights
nine years ago; how the populace with loud clamour
set fire to the houses of those in power, and murdered
the Governor; and how later they were punished
for these things because, though their anger
was justified, what they did exceeded all limits.<note place='foot'>In 354 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> there was a riot at Antioch in consequence of
scarcity of food; Constantius sent troops to punish the
citizens for the murder of Theophilus the Governor of Syria.</note>)
</p>

<p>
Ὕπὲρ τίνος οὖν πρὸς θεῶν ἀχαριστούμεθα;
ὅτι τρέφομεν ὑμᾶς οἴκοθεν, [D] ὃ μέχρι σήμερον
ὑπῆρξεν οὐδεμιᾷ πόλει, καὶ τρέφομεν οὕτω
λαμπρῶς; ὅτι τὸν κατάλογον ὑμῶν ηὐξήσαμεν;
ὅτι κλέπτοντας ἑλόντες οὐκ ἐπεξήλθομεν; ἑνὸς
ἢ δύο βούλεσθε ὑμᾶς ὑπομνήσω, μή τις ὑπολάβῃ
σχῆμα καὶ ῥητορείαν εἶναι καὶ προσποίησιν τὸ
πρᾶγμα; γῆς κλήρους οἶμαι τρισχιλίους ἔφατε
ἀσπόρους εἶναι καὶ ᾐτήσασθε λαβεῖν, λαβόντες
<pb n='510'/><anchor id='Pg510'/><anchor id='Pg511'/>
δ᾽ ἐνείμασθε πάντες οἱ μὴ δεόμενοι. τοῦτο ἐξετασθὲν
ἀνεφάνη σαφῶς. ἀφελόμενος δ᾽ αὐτοὺς
ἐγὼ τῶν ἐχόντον οὐ δικαίως, καὶ πολυπραγμονήσας
οὐδὲν ὑπὲρ τῶν ἔμπροσθεν, ὧν ἔσχον
ἀτελεῖς, [371] οὓς μάλιστα ἐχρῆν ὑποτελεῖς εἶναι,
ταῖς βαρυτάταις ἔνειμα λειτουργίαις αὐτοὺς τῆς
πόλεως. καὶ νῦν ἀτελεῖς ἔχουσιν οἱ καθ᾽ ἕκαστον
ὑμῖν ἐνιαυτὸν ἱπποτροφοῦντες γῆς κλήρους ἐγγὺς
τρισχιλίους, ἐπινοίᾳ μὲν καὶ οἰκονομίᾳ τοῦ θείου
τοὐμοῦ καὶ ὁμωνύμου, χάριτι δ᾽ ἐμῇ, ὃς δὴ τοὺς
πανούργους καὶ κλέπτας οὕτω κολάζων εἰκότως
ὑμῖν φαίνομαι τὸν κόσμον ἀνατρέπειν. [B] εὖ γὰρ
ἴστε ὅτι πρὸς τοὺς τοιούτους ἡ πρᾳότης αὔξει
καὶ τρέφει τὴν ἐν τοῖς ἀνθρώποις κακίαν.
</p>

<p>
(Why, I repeat, in Heaven's name, am I treated
with ingratitude? Is it because I feed you from
my own purse, a thing which before this day has
never happened to any city, and moreover feed
you so generously? Is it because I increased the
register of Senators? Or because, when I caught
you in the act of stealing, I did not proceed
against you? Let me, if you please, remind you
of one or two instances, so that no one may think
that what I say is a pretext or mere rhetoric
or a false claim. You said, I think, that three
thousand lots of land were uncultivated, and you
asked to have them; and when you had got them
you all divided them among you though you did
not need them. This matter was investigated and
brought to light beyond doubt. Then I took the
lots away from those who held them unjustly,
and made no inquiries about the lands which they
had before acquired, and for which they paid no
taxes, though they ought most certainly to have
been taxed, and I appointed these men to the
most expensive public services in the city. And
even now they who breed horses for you every
year hold nearly three thousand lots of land
exempt from taxation. This is due in the first place
to the judgment and management of my uncle
and namesake<note place='foot'>cf. 340 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a</hi>, 365 <hi rend='smallcaps'>c</hi>.</note> but also to my own kindness; and
since this is the way in which I punish rascals
and thieves, I naturally seem to you to be turning
the world upside down. For you know very well
that clemency towards men of this sort increases
and fosters wickedness among mankind.)
</p>

<p>
Ὁ λόγος οὖν μοι καὶ ἐνταῦθα περιίσταται πάλιν
εἰς ὅπερ βούλομαι. πάντων γὰρ ἐμαυτῷ τῶν κακῶν
αἴτιος γίγνομαι εἰς ἀχάριστα καταθέμενος ἤθη
τὰς χάριτας. ἀνοίας οὖν ἐστι τῆς ἐμῆς τοῦτο
καὶ οὐ τῆς ὑμετέρας ἐλευθερίας. ἐγὼ μὲν δὴ
τὰ πρὸς ὑμᾶς εἶναι πειράσομαι τοῦ λοιποῦ συνετώτερος·
ὑμῖν [C] δὲ οἱ θεοὶ τῆς εἰς ἡμᾶς εὐνοίας
καὶ τιμῆς, ἣν ἐτιμήσατε δημοσίᾳ, τὰς ἀμοιβὰς
ἀποδοῖεν.
</p>

<p>
(Well then, my discourse has now come round
again to the point which I wished to arrive at.
I mean to say that I am myself responsible for
all the wrong that has been done to me, because
I transformed your graciousness to ungracious ways.
This therefore is the fault of my own folly and
not of your licence. For the future therefore in my
dealings with you I indeed shall endeavour to be
more sensible: but to you, in return for your good
will towards me and the honour wherewith you have
publicly honoured me, may the gods duly pay the
recompense!)
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='513'/><anchor id='Pg513'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Index</head>

<lg>
<l>Abantes, the, <ref target='Pg497'>497</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Abaris, <ref target='Pg245'>245</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Abderos, <ref target='Pg113'>113</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Academies, the, <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Academy, the, <ref target='Pg125'>125</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Achaeans, the, <ref target='Pg317'>317</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Acheron, <ref target='Pg129'>129</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Achilles, <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref>, <ref target='Pg189'>189</ref>, <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref>, <ref target='Pg387'>387</ref>, <ref target='Pg409'>409</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Acropolis, the, <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Actium, <ref target='Pg389'>389</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Adonis, gardens of, <ref target='Pg399'>399</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Adrasteia, <ref target='Pg509'>509</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aegean, the, <ref target='Pg205'>205</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aegina, <ref target='Pg019'>19</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aeschines, <ref target='Pg153'>153</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aeschylus, <ref target='Pg107'>107</ref>, <ref target='Pg133'>133</ref>, <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref>, <ref target='Pg333'>333</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aesop, <ref target='Pg081'>81</ref>, <ref target='Pg347'>347</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aetios, <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aetolians, the, <ref target='Pg387'>387</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Africanus, <ref target='Pg257'>257</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Agamemnon, <ref target='Pg317'>317</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Agathocles, <ref target='Pg405'>405</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Agesilaus, <ref target='Pg157'>157</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Agrippina, city of, <ref target='Pg271'>271</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ajaxes, the, <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alcaeus, <ref target='Pg421'>421</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Alcibiades</hi>, the, <ref target='Pg027'>27</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alcibiades, <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref>, <ref target='Pg209'>209</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alcinous, <ref target='Pg461'>461</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alcmena, <ref target='Pg367'>367</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alexander the Great, <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref>, <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref>, <ref target='Pg093'>93</ref>, <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref>, <ref target='Pg193'>193</ref>, <ref target='Pg203'>203</ref>, <ref target='Pg211'>211</ref>, <ref target='Pg229'>229</ref>, <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref>, <ref target='Pg367'>367</ref>, <ref target='Pg373'>373</ref>, <ref target='Pg375'>375</ref>, <ref target='Pg377'>377</ref>, <ref target='Pg379'>379</ref>, <ref target='Pg381'>381</ref>, <ref target='Pg389'>389</ref>, <ref target='Pg393'>393</ref>, <ref target='Pg399'>399</ref>, <ref target='Pg403'>403</ref>, <ref target='Pg407'>407</ref>, <ref target='Pg413'>413</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alexander, Severus, <ref target='Pg361'>361</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alexandrians, the, <ref target='Pg503'>503</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alps Cottian, the, <ref target='Pg287'>287</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ammianus Marcellinus, <ref target='Pg241'>241</ref>, <ref target='Pg253'>253</ref>, <ref target='Pg257'>257</ref>, <ref target='Pg265'>265</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Amphiaraus, <ref target='Pg333'>333</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Anacharsis, <ref target='Pg245'>245</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Anacreon, <ref target='Pg421'>421</ref>, <ref target='Pg499'>499</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Anatolius, <ref target='Pg121'>121</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Anaxagoras, <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref>, <ref target='Pg181'>181</ref>, <ref target='Pg185'>185</ref>, <ref target='Pg229'>229</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Anthology, Palatine, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Anticyra, <ref target='Pg121'>121</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Antilochus, <ref target='Pg193'>193</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Antinous, <ref target='Pg357'>357</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Antioch, <ref target='Pg295'>295</ref>, <ref target='Pg418'>418</ref>, <ref target='Pg419'>419</ref>, <ref target='Pg427'>427</ref>, <ref target='Pg429'>429</ref>, <ref target='Pg439'>439</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Antiochus, <ref target='Pg447'>447</ref>, <ref target='Pg449'>449</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Antipater, <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Antisthenes, <ref target='Pg002'>2</ref>, <ref target='Pg005'>5</ref>, <ref target='Pg023'>23</ref>, <ref target='Pg025'>25</ref>, <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref>, <ref target='Pg099'>99</ref>, <ref target='Pg103'>103</ref>, <ref target='Pg105'>105</ref>, <ref target='Pg169'>169</ref>, <ref target='Pg229'>229</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Antoninus Pius, <ref target='Pg357'>357</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Antony, M., <ref target='Pg387'>387</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aphrodite, <ref target='Pg155'>155</ref>, <ref target='Pg351'>351</ref>, <ref target='Pg357'>357</ref>, <ref target='Pg413'>413</ref>, <ref target='Pg481'>481</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Apollo, <ref target='Pg025'>25</ref>, <ref target='Pg037'>37</ref>, <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref>, <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref>, <ref target='Pg157'>157</ref>, <ref target='Pg159'>159</ref>, <ref target='Pg193'>193</ref>, <ref target='Pg245'>245</ref>, <ref target='Pg351'>351</ref>, <ref target='Pg355'>355</ref>, <ref target='Pg365'>365</ref>, <ref target='Pg371'>371</ref>, <ref target='Pg413'>413</ref>, <ref target='Pg418'>418</ref>, <ref target='Pg439'>439</ref>, <ref target='Pg445'>445</ref>, <ref target='Pg461'>461</ref>, <ref target='Pg475'>475</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Apollodorus, <ref target='Pg111'>111</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Appian, <ref target='Pg383'>383</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arabs, the, <ref target='Pg451'>451</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Araxius, <ref target='Pg217'>217</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Archidamus, <ref target='Pg093'>93</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Archilochus, <ref target='Pg079'>79</ref>, <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref>, <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref>, <ref target='Pg325'>325</ref>, <ref target='Pg421'>421</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Areius, <ref target='Pg233'>233</ref>, <ref target='Pg391'>391</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ares, <ref target='Pg283'>283</ref>, <ref target='Pg409'>409</ref>, <ref target='Pg413'>413</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arete, <ref target='Pg217'>217</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Argentoratum (Strasburg), <ref target='Pg271'>271</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ariovistus, <ref target='Pg379'>379</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aristides the Just, <ref target='Pg245'>245</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aristides the rhetorician, <ref target='Pg153'>153</ref>, <ref target='Pg301'>301</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aristophanes, <ref target='Pg175'>175</ref>, <ref target='Pg219'>219</ref>, <ref target='Pg355'>355</ref>, <ref target='Pg457'>457</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aristotelian Paraphrases of Themistius, <ref target='Pg200'>200</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aristotle, <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref>, <ref target='Pg031'>31</ref>, <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref>, <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref>, <ref target='Pg105'>105</ref>, <ref target='Pg155'>155</ref>, <ref target='Pg157'>157</ref>, <ref target='Pg200'>200</ref>, <ref target='Pg211'>211</ref>, <ref target='Pg221'>221</ref>, <ref target='Pg227'>227</ref>, <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref>, <ref target='Pg325'>325</ref>, <ref target='Pg363'>363</ref>, <ref target='Pg465'>465</ref>, <ref target='Pg481'>481</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Asclepiades, the Cynic, <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Asclepius, <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Asia, <ref target='Pg213'>213</ref>, <ref target='Pg377'>377</ref>, <ref target='Pg379'>379</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Asmus, <ref target='Pg070'>70</ref>, <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ate, <ref target='Pg129'>129</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='514'/><anchor id='Pg514'/>

<lg>
<l>Athenaeus, <ref target='Pg111'>111</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Athene, <ref target='Pg111'>111</ref>, <ref target='Pg125'>125</ref>, <ref target='Pg137'>137</ref>, <ref target='Pg139'>139</ref>, <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref>, <ref target='Pg143'>143</ref>, <ref target='Pg145'>145</ref>, <ref target='Pg147'>147</ref>, <ref target='Pg247'>247</ref>, <ref target='Pg249'>249</ref>, <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref>, <ref target='Pg283'>283</ref>, <ref target='Pg301'>301</ref>, <ref target='Pg441'>441</ref>, <ref target='Pg461'>461</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Athenians, the, <ref target='Pg019'>19</ref>, <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref>, <ref target='Pg181'>181</ref>, <ref target='Pg213'>213</ref>, <ref target='Pg221'>221</ref>, <ref target='Pg241'>241</ref>, <ref target='Pg451'>451</ref>, <ref target='Pg457'>457</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Athenians, Letter to the</hi>, <ref target='Pg242'>242-291</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Athenodorus, <ref target='Pg353'>353</ref>, <ref target='Pg391'>391</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Athens, <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref>, <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref>, <ref target='Pg093'>93</ref>, <ref target='Pg095'>95</ref>, <ref target='Pg175'>175</ref>, <ref target='Pg183'>183</ref>, <ref target='Pg217'>217</ref>, <ref target='Pg219'>219</ref>, <ref target='Pg241'>241</ref>, <ref target='Pg243'>243</ref>, <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Athos, Mount, <ref target='Pg173'>173</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Augustus, Emperor, <ref target='Pg233'>233</ref>, <ref target='Pg353'>353</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aurelian, <ref target='Pg361'>361</ref>, <ref target='Pg363'>363</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Autolycus, <ref target='Pg453'>453</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Babylas, <ref target='Pg485'>485</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bacchanals, the, <ref target='Pg113'>113</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Basilina, <ref target='Pg461'>461</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bernays, <ref target='Pg002'>2</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bithynia, <ref target='Pg479'>479</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bosporus, <ref target='Pg205'>205</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brigantia (Bregentz), <ref target='Pg287'>287</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Britain, <ref target='Pg271'>271</ref>, <ref target='Pg279'>279</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brutus, <ref target='Pg389'>389</ref>, <ref target='Pg405'>405</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Burton, <ref target='Pg423'>423</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cadmeans, the, <ref target='Pg333'>333</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cadmus, <ref target='Pg113'>113</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Caesar, Caius, <ref target='Pg405'>405</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Caesar, Julius, <ref target='Pg351'>351</ref>, <ref target='Pg367'>367</ref>, <ref target='Pg369'>369</ref>, <ref target='Pg375'>375</ref>, <ref target='Pg379'>379</ref>, <ref target='Pg381'>381</ref>, <ref target='Pg389'>389</ref>, <ref target='Pg397'>397</ref>, <ref target='Pg403'>403</ref>, <ref target='Pg413'>413</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Caesarea, <ref target='Pg418'>418</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Caesars, The</hi>, <ref target='Pg344'>344-415</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Caligula, <ref target='Pg353'>353</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Calliope, <ref target='Pg103'>103</ref>, <ref target='Pg425'>425</ref>, <ref target='Pg475'>475</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Callisthenes, <ref target='Pg169'>169</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Calypso, <ref target='Pg461'>461</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cappadocia, <ref target='Pg251'>251</ref>, <ref target='Pg257'>257</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Capri, <ref target='Pg353'>353</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Caracalla, <ref target='Pg359'>359</ref>, <ref target='Pg367'>367</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Caria, <ref target='Pg072'>72</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Carians, the, <ref target='Pg377'>377</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Carterius, <ref target='Pg217'>217</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Carus, <ref target='Pg365'>365</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cassius, <ref target='Pg389'>389</ref>, <ref target='Pg405'>405</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cato, <ref target='Pg209'>209</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cato the Younger, <ref target='Pg477'>477</ref>, <ref target='Pg479'>479</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cebes, <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Celts, the, <ref target='Pg195'>195</ref>, <ref target='Pg279'>279</ref>, <ref target='Pg377'>377</ref>, <ref target='Pg429'>429</ref>, <ref target='Pg433'>433</ref>, <ref target='Pg451'>451</ref>, <ref target='Pg479'>479</ref>, <ref target='Pg483'>483</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Centumcellae, <ref target='Pg287'>287</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chaeronea, <ref target='Pg479'>479</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chalcis, <ref target='Pg505'>505</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chamavi, the, <ref target='Pg273'>273</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Charmides, <ref target='Pg175'>175</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Charybdis, <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chnodomar, <ref target='Pg271'>271</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chrisostomos, Johannes <ref target='Pg485'>485</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Christ, <ref target='Pg475'>475</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chrysippus, <ref target='Pg209'>209</ref>, <ref target='Pg325'>325</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chrysostom, Saint, <ref target='Pg419'>419</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chytron, <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cicero, <ref target='Pg245'>245</ref>, <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref>, <ref target='Pg427'>427</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Circe, <ref target='Pg461'>461</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Citium, <ref target='Pg017'>17</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Claudius, Emperor, <ref target='Pg355'>355</ref>, <ref target='Pg361'>361</ref>, <ref target='Pg413'>413</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Clazomenae, <ref target='Pg229'>229</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cleinias, <ref target='Pg209'>209</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cleisthenes, <ref target='Pg009'>9</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cleitus, <ref target='Pg403'>403</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cocytus, <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref>, <ref target='Pg129'>129</ref>, <ref target='Pg355'>355</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Commodus, <ref target='Pg359'>359</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Constance, Lake, <ref target='Pg287'>287</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Constans, <ref target='Pg367'>367</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Constantine, <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref>, <ref target='Pg367'>367</ref>, <ref target='Pg371'>371</ref>, <ref target='Pg397'>397</ref>, <ref target='Pg399'>399</ref>, <ref target='Pg411'>411</ref>, <ref target='Pg413'>413</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Constantine II, <ref target='Pg367'>367</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Constantinople, <ref target='Pg003'>3</ref>, <ref target='Pg205'>205</ref>, <ref target='Pg343'>342</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Constantius, <ref target='Pg002'>2</ref>, <ref target='Pg070'>70</ref>, <ref target='Pg121'>121</ref>, <ref target='Pg143'>143</ref>, <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref>, <ref target='Pg175'>175</ref>, <ref target='Pg197'>197</ref>, <ref target='Pg200'>200</ref>, <ref target='Pg241'>241</ref>, <ref target='Pg251'>251</ref>, <ref target='Pg253'>253</ref>, <ref target='Pg255'>255</ref>, <ref target='Pg257'>257</ref>, <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref>, <ref target='Pg267'>267</ref>, <ref target='Pg269'>269</ref>, <ref target='Pg271'>271</ref>, <ref target='Pg273'>273</ref>, <ref target='Pg275'>275</ref>, <ref target='Pg279'>279</ref>, <ref target='Pg281'>281</ref>, <ref target='Pg285'>285</ref>, <ref target='Pg367'>367</ref>, <ref target='Pg418'>418</ref>, <ref target='Pg427'>427</ref>, <ref target='Pg429'>429</ref>, <ref target='Pg461'>461</ref>, <ref target='Pg475'>475</ref>, <ref target='Pg485'>485</ref>, <ref target='Pg491'>491</ref>, <ref target='Pg509'>509</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Constantius Chlorus, <ref target='Pg365'>365</ref>, <ref target='Pg413'>413</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Crassus, <ref target='Pg383'>383</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Crates, <ref target='Pg002'>2</ref>, <ref target='Pg017'>17</ref>, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>, <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>, <ref target='Pg057'>57</ref>, <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref>, <ref target='Pg083'>83</ref>, <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref>, <ref target='Pg095'>95</ref>, <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cratinus, <ref target='Pg427'>427</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Crete, <ref target='Pg077'>77</ref>, <ref target='Pg193'>193</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Crito</hi>, the, <ref target='Pg027'>27</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Critoboulos, <ref target='Pg181'>181</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Croesus, <ref target='Pg435'>435</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cyclades, the, <ref target='Pg455'>455</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cyclops, the, <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cynics, the, <ref target='Pg002'>2</ref>, <ref target='Pg003'>3</ref>, <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Cynics, To the Uneducated</hi>, <ref target='Pg004'>4-65</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cyprus, <ref target='Pg017'>17</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Damophilus, <ref target='Pg479'>479</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Danube, the, <ref target='Pg271'>271</ref>, <ref target='Pg377'>377</ref>, <ref target='Pg391'>391</ref>, <ref target='Pg393'>393</ref>, <ref target='Pg451'>451</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Daphne, <ref target='Pg418'>418</ref>, <ref target='Pg439'>439</ref>, <ref target='Pg445'>445</ref>, <ref target='Pg475'>475</ref>, <ref target='Pg487'>487</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Daphnis, <ref target='Pg425'>425</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Darius, <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref>, <ref target='Pg213'>213</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Darius III, <ref target='Pg377'>377</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Decentius, <ref target='Pg281'>281</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Deioces, <ref target='Pg245'>245</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Delos, <ref target='Pg153'>153</ref>, <ref target='Pg461'>461</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='515'/><anchor id='Pg515'/>

<lg>
<l>Delphi, <ref target='Pg363'>363</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Delphic oracle, <ref target='Pg189'>189</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Demeter, <ref target='Pg035'>35</ref>, <ref target='Pg445'>445</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Demetrius, the freedman, <ref target='Pg477'>477</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Democritus, <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref>, <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref>, <ref target='Pg229'>229</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Demodocus, <ref target='Pg459'>459</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Demonax, <ref target='Pg002'>2</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Demosthenes, <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref>, <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref>, <ref target='Pg153'>153</ref>, <ref target='Pg175'>175</ref>, <ref target='Pg237'>237</ref>, <ref target='Pg253'>253</ref>, <ref target='Pg291'>291</ref>, <ref target='Pg495'>495</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dio of Sicily, <ref target='Pg209'>209</ref>, <ref target='Pg313'>313</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dio Chrysostom, <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref>, <ref target='Pg070'>70</ref>, <ref target='Pg071'>71</ref>, <ref target='Pg077'>77</ref>, <ref target='Pg093'>93</ref>, <ref target='Pg111'>111</ref>, <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref>, <ref target='Pg175'>175</ref>, <ref target='Pg189'>189</ref>, <ref target='Pg203'>203</ref>, <ref target='Pg391'>391</ref>, <ref target='Pg423'>423</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Diocletian, <ref target='Pg365'>365</ref>, <ref target='Pg367'>367</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Diogenes, the Cynic, <ref target='Pg002'>2</ref>, <ref target='Pg003'>3</ref>, <ref target='Pg005'>5</ref>, <ref target='Pg019'>19</ref>, <ref target='Pg023'>23</ref>, <ref target='Pg025'>25</ref>, <ref target='Pg027'>27</ref>, <ref target='Pg029'>29</ref>, <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref>, <ref target='Pg035'>35</ref>, <ref target='Pg037'>37</ref>, <ref target='Pg039'>39</ref>, <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref>, <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref>, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>, <ref target='Pg057'>57</ref>, <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref>, <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref>, <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref>, <ref target='Pg083'>83</ref>, <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref>, <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref>, <ref target='Pg093'>93</ref>, <ref target='Pg157'>157</ref>, <ref target='Pg159'>159</ref>, <ref target='Pg161'>161</ref>, <ref target='Pg211'>211</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Diogenes Laertius, <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref>, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>, <ref target='Pg125'>125</ref>, <ref target='Pg159'>159</ref>, <ref target='Pg177'>177</ref>, <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref>, <ref target='Pg181'>181</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Diomede, <ref target='Pg219'>219</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dionysius, <ref target='Pg405'>405</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dionysus, <ref target='Pg070'>70</ref>, <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref>, <ref target='Pg107'>107</ref>, <ref target='Pg109'>109</ref>, <ref target='Pg111'>111</ref>, <ref target='Pg113'>113</ref>, <ref target='Pg115'>115</ref>, <ref target='Pg117'>117</ref>, <ref target='Pg203'>203</ref>, <ref target='Pg335'>335</ref>, <ref target='Pg349'>349</ref>, <ref target='Pg353'>353</ref>, <ref target='Pg363'>363</ref>, <ref target='Pg371'>371</ref>, <ref target='Pg395'>395</ref>, <ref target='Pg403'>403</ref>, <ref target='Pg407'>407</ref>, <ref target='Pg427'>427</ref>, <ref target='Pg475'>475</ref>, <ref target='Pg481'>481</ref>, <ref target='Pg499'>499</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Domitian, <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref>, <ref target='Pg357'>357</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dynamius, <ref target='Pg257'>257</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dyrrachium, <ref target='Pg385'>385</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Egypt, <ref target='Pg155'>155</ref>, <ref target='Pg233'>233</ref>, <ref target='Pg355'>355</ref>, <ref target='Pg379'>379</ref>, <ref target='Pg389'>389</ref>, <ref target='Pg503'>503</ref>, <ref target='Pg505'>505</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Egyptians, the, <ref target='Pg167'>167</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Emesa, <ref target='Pg361'>361</ref>, <ref target='Pg475'>475</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Empedocles, <ref target='Pg129'>129</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Empedotimus, <ref target='Pg313'>313</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Epameinondas, <ref target='Pg159'>159</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Epicharmus, <ref target='Pg183'>183</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Epictetus, <ref target='Pg002'>2</ref>, <ref target='Pg153'>153</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Epictetus Bishop, <ref target='Pg287'>287</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Epicurus, <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref>, <ref target='Pg207'>207</ref>, <ref target='Pg217'>217</ref>, <ref target='Pg327'>327</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Erasistratus, <ref target='Pg447'>447</ref>, <ref target='Pg449'>449</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eretria, <ref target='Pg229'>229</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Euboea, <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Euclid of Megara, <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Euphrates, the, <ref target='Pg391'>391</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eupolis, <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Euripides, <ref target='Pg005'>5</ref>, <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref>, <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref>, <ref target='Pg057'>57</ref>, <ref target='Pg095'>95</ref>, <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref>, <ref target='Pg113'>113</ref>, <ref target='Pg133'>133</ref>, <ref target='Pg185'>185</ref>, <ref target='Pg205'>205</ref>, <ref target='Pg249'>249</ref>, <ref target='Pg323'>323</ref>, <ref target='Pg333'>333</ref>, <ref target='Pg361'>361</ref>, <ref target='Pg397'>397</ref>, <ref target='Pg403'>403</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Europe, <ref target='Pg377'>377</ref>, <ref target='Pg379'>379</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eurycleia, <ref target='Pg441'>441</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eusebia, <ref target='Pg255'>255</ref>, <ref target='Pg257'>257</ref>, <ref target='Pg261'>261</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eusebius, <ref target='Pg253'>253</ref>, <ref target='Pg257'>257</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fates, the, <ref target='Pg135'>135</ref>, <ref target='Pg137'>137</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Faustina, <ref target='Pg359'>359</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Felix, <ref target='Pg257'>257</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Florentius, <ref target='Pg271'>271</ref>, <ref target='Pg273'>273</ref>, <ref target='Pg279'>279</ref>, <ref target='Pg281'>281</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Frazer, <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref>, <ref target='Pg399'>399</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Furius Camillus, <ref target='Pg383'>383</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gadara, <ref target='Pg023'>23</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gades, <ref target='Pg381'>381</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Galba, <ref target='Pg355'>355</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Galilaeans, the, <ref target='Pg037'>37</ref>, <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref>, <ref target='Pg327'>327</ref>, <ref target='Pg337'>337</ref>, <ref target='Pg475'>475</ref>, <ref target='Pg491'>491</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gallienus, <ref target='Pg361'>361</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gallus, <ref target='Pg269'>269</ref>, <ref target='Pg253'>253</ref>, <ref target='Pg255'>255</ref>, <ref target='Pg429'>429</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ganymede, <ref target='Pg357'>357</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gaudentius, <ref target='Pg257'>257</ref>, <ref target='Pg277'>277</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gaul, <ref target='Pg121'>121</ref>, <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref>, <ref target='Pg183'>183</ref>, <ref target='Pg195'>195</ref>, <ref target='Pg257'>257</ref>, <ref target='Pg267'>267</ref>, <ref target='Pg269'>269</ref>, <ref target='Pg271'>271</ref>, <ref target='Pg279'>279</ref>, <ref target='Pg287'>287</ref>, <ref target='Pg289'>289</ref>, <ref target='Pg377'>377</ref>, <ref target='Pg379'>379</ref>, <ref target='Pg457'>457</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gauls, the, <ref target='Pg385'>385</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Genesis, <ref target='Pg037'>37</ref>, <ref target='Pg301'>301</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Germans, the, <ref target='Pg269'>269</ref>, <ref target='Pg385'>385</ref>, <ref target='Pg389'>389</ref>, <ref target='Pg397'>397</ref>, <ref target='Pg479'>479</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Geta, <ref target='Pg359'>359</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Getae, the, <ref target='Pg357'>357</ref>, <ref target='Pg377'>377</ref>, <ref target='Pg393'>393</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gintonius, <ref target='Pg279'>279</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Glaucon, <ref target='Pg209'>209</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Glaukos, <ref target='Pg219'>219</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Graces, the, <ref target='Pg351'>351</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Greeks, the, <ref target='Pg385'>385</ref>, <ref target='Pg387'>387</ref>, <ref target='Pg451'>451</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hades, <ref target='Pg103'>103</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hadrian, <ref target='Pg357'>357</ref>, <ref target='Pg418'>418</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Harrison, J., <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hector, <ref target='Pg171'>171</ref>, <ref target='Pg401'>401</ref>, <ref target='Pg441'>441</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Helen, <ref target='Pg167'>167</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Heliogabalus, <ref target='Pg361'>361</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Helios, <ref target='Pg083'>83</ref>, <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref>, <ref target='Pg121'>121</ref>, <ref target='Pg135'>135</ref>, <ref target='Pg137'>137</ref>, <ref target='Pg139'>139</ref>, <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref>, <ref target='Pg143'>143</ref>, <ref target='Pg145'>145</ref>, <ref target='Pg147'>147</ref>, <ref target='Pg261'>261</ref>, <ref target='Pg283'>283</ref>, <ref target='Pg363'>363</ref>, <ref target='Pg379'>379</ref>, <ref target='Pg471'>471</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hera, <ref target='Pg077'>77</ref>, <ref target='Pg113'>113</ref>, <ref target='Pg151'>151</ref>, <ref target='Pg349'>349</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Heracleitus, <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref>, <ref target='Pg023'>23</ref>, <ref target='Pg103'>103</ref>, <ref target='Pg129'>129</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Heracles, <ref target='Pg023'>23</ref>, <ref target='Pg070'>70</ref>, <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref>, <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref>, <ref target='Pg103'>103</ref>, <ref target='Pg105'>105</ref>, <ref target='Pg109'>109</ref>, <ref target='Pg111'>111</ref>, <ref target='Pg113'>113</ref>, <ref target='Pg203'>203</ref>, <ref target='Pg229'>229</ref>, <ref target='Pg347'>347</ref>, <ref target='Pg367'>367</ref>, <ref target='Pg375'>375</ref>, <ref target='Pg387'>387</ref>, <ref target='Pg413'>413</ref>, <ref target='Pg499'>499</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Heraclius, To the Cynic</hi>, <ref target='Pg073'>73-161</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Heraclius the Cynic, <ref target='Pg069'>69</ref>, <ref target='Pg070'>70</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hercynian forest, <ref target='Pg479'>479</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hermes, <ref target='Pg009'>9</ref>, <ref target='Pg113'>113</ref>, <ref target='Pg125'>125</ref>, <ref target='Pg139'>139</ref>, <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref>, <ref target='Pg147'>147</ref>, <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref>, <ref target='Pg157'>157</ref>, <ref target='Pg347'>347</ref>, <ref target='Pg349'>349</ref>, <ref target='Pg357'>357</ref>, <ref target='Pg365'>365</ref>, <ref target='Pg367'>367</ref>, <ref target='Pg369'>369</ref>, <ref target='Pg371'>371</ref>, <ref target='Pg373'>373</ref>, <ref target='Pg375'>375</ref>, <ref target='Pg399'>399</ref>, <ref target='Pg403'>403</ref>, <ref target='Pg405'>405</ref>, <ref target='Pg407'>407</ref>, <ref target='Pg411'>411</ref>, <ref target='Pg415'>415</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Herodotus, <ref target='Pg009'>9</ref>, <ref target='Pg353'>353</ref>, <ref target='Pg435'>435</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='516'/><anchor id='Pg516'/>

<lg>
<l>Hesiod, <ref target='Pg079'>79</ref>, <ref target='Pg083'>83</ref>, <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref>, <ref target='Pg177'>177</ref>, <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref>, <ref target='Pg363'>363</ref>, <ref target='Pg443'>443</ref>, <ref target='Pg447'>447</ref>, <ref target='Pg507'>507</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hierapolis, <ref target='Pg505'>505</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Himerius, <ref target='Pg153'>153</ref>, <ref target='Pg467'>467</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hippocleides, <ref target='Pg009'>9</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hipponax, <ref target='Pg325'>325</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Homer, <ref target='Pg013'>13</ref>, <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref>, <ref target='Pg037'>37</ref>, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref>, <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref>, <ref target='Pg081'>81</ref>, <ref target='Pg083'>83</ref>, <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref>, <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref>, <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref>, <ref target='Pg137'>137</ref>, <ref target='Pg145'>145</ref>, <ref target='Pg167'>167</ref>, <ref target='Pg171'>171</ref>, <ref target='Pg175'>175</ref>, <ref target='Pg177'>177</ref>, <ref target='Pg183'>183</ref>, <ref target='Pg187'>187</ref>, <ref target='Pg189'>189</ref>, <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref>, <ref target='Pg193'>193</ref>, <ref target='Pg197'>197</ref>, <ref target='Pg211'>211</ref>, <ref target='Pg219'>219</ref>, <ref target='Pg229'>229</ref>, <ref target='Pg409'>409</ref>, <ref target='Pg425'>425</ref>, <ref target='Pg435'>435</ref>, <ref target='Pg441'>441</ref>, <ref target='Pg443'>443</ref>, <ref target='Pg447'>447</ref>, <ref target='Pg451'>451</ref>, <ref target='Pg453'>453</ref>, <ref target='Pg459'>459</ref>, <ref target='Pg461'>461</ref>, <ref target='Pg467'>467</ref>, <ref target='Pg497'>497</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Horace, <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref>, <ref target='Pg121'>121</ref>, <ref target='Pg325'>325</ref>, <ref target='Pg421'>421</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hylas, <ref target='Pg113'>113</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hymettus, <ref target='Pg169'>169</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hyperboreans, the, <ref target='Pg245'>245</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Iamblichus, <ref target='Pg025'>25</ref>, <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref>, <ref target='Pg105'>105</ref>, <ref target='Pg117'>117</ref>, <ref target='Pg151'>151</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Iberians, the, <ref target='Pg379'>379</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Illyria, <ref target='Pg183'>183</ref>, <ref target='Pg195'>195</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Illyrians, the, <ref target='Pg377'>377</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Illyricum, <ref target='Pg241'>241</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>India, <ref target='Pg077'>77</ref>, <ref target='Pg115'>115</ref>, <ref target='Pg387'>387</ref>, <ref target='Pg401'>401</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Iolaus, <ref target='Pg113'>113</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ionia, <ref target='Pg183'>183</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ionian Sea, the, <ref target='Pg205'>205</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Iphicles, <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ismenias of Thebes, <ref target='Pg423'>423</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Isocrates, <ref target='Pg150'>150</ref>, <ref target='Pg275'>275</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Isthmus, the, <ref target='Pg093'>93</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Italians, the, <ref target='Pg377'>377</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Italy, <ref target='Pg121'>121</ref>, <ref target='Pg287'>287</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ithaca, <ref target='Pg459'>459</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ixion, <ref target='Pg077'>77</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jesus, <ref target='Pg327'>327</ref>, <ref target='Pg413'>413</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jews, the, <ref target='Pg313'>313</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Julian, Count, <ref target='Pg249'>249</ref>, <ref target='Pg429'>429</ref>, <ref target='Pg497'>497</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jupiter Capitoline, <ref target='Pg355'>355</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Juvenal, <ref target='Pg011'>11</ref>, <ref target='Pg125'>125</ref>, <ref target='Pg355'>355</ref>, <ref target='Pg383'>383</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kasios, Mt., <ref target='Pg487'>487</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Kronia</hi>, the lost, <ref target='Pg343'>343</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kronia, the, <ref target='Pg343'>343</ref>, <ref target='Pg345'>345</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kronos, <ref target='Pg213'>213</ref>, <ref target='Pg215'>215</ref>, <ref target='Pg345'>345</ref>, <ref target='Pg347'>347</ref>, <ref target='Pg369'>369</ref>, <ref target='Pg371'>371</ref>, <ref target='Pg413'>413</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lacedaemonians, the, <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref>, <ref target='Pg243'>243</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Laelius, <ref target='Pg177'>177</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Laestrygons, the, <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lais, <ref target='Pg127'>127</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lesbos, <ref target='Pg421'>421</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Leto, <ref target='Pg153'>153</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Letter, Fragment of a</hi>, <ref target='Pg296'>296-339</ref>, <ref target='Pg343'>343</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Libanius, <ref target='Pg200'>200</ref>, <ref target='Pg241'>241</ref>, <ref target='Pg301'>301</ref>, <ref target='Pg418'>418</ref>, <ref target='Pg419'>419</ref>, <ref target='Pg467'>467</ref>, <ref target='Pg485'>485</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lichas, <ref target='Pg113'>113</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Licinius, <ref target='Pg367'>367</ref>, <ref target='Pg397'>397</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Livy, <ref target='Pg161'>161</ref>, <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Loos, the month, <ref target='Pg487'>487</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lotos-Eaters, the, <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lucian, <ref target='Pg002'>2</ref>, <ref target='Pg005'>5</ref>, <ref target='Pg023'>23</ref>, <ref target='Pg245'>245</ref>, <ref target='Pg323'>323</ref>, <ref target='Pg343'>343</ref>, <ref target='Pg353'>353</ref>, <ref target='Pg375'>375</ref>, <ref target='Pg383'>383</ref>, <ref target='Pg391'>391</ref>, <ref target='Pg401'>401</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lucilianus, <ref target='Pg279'>279</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lucius Gellius, <ref target='Pg383'>383</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lucius Verus, <ref target='Pg359'>359</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lucretius, <ref target='Pg029'>29</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lucullus, <ref target='Pg383'>383</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lupicinus, <ref target='Pg275'>275</ref>, <ref target='Pg279'>279</ref>, <ref target='Pg281'>281</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lutetia (Paris), <ref target='Pg429'>429</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lyceum, the, <ref target='Pg125'>125</ref>, <ref target='Pg157'>157</ref>, <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lycurgus, <ref target='Pg205'>205</ref>, <ref target='Pg225'>225</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lydians, the, <ref target='Pg435'>435</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Macedonians, the, <ref target='Pg213'>213</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Macellum, <ref target='Pg251'>251</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Macrinus, <ref target='Pg361'>361</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Magnentius, <ref target='Pg367'>367</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Magnesia, <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mallians, the, <ref target='Pg401'>401</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mammaea, <ref target='Pg361'>361</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Marathon, <ref target='Pg457'>457</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Marcellus, <ref target='Pg267'>267</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Marcus Aurelius, <ref target='Pg203'>203</ref>, <ref target='Pg359'>359</ref>, <ref target='Pg371'>371</ref>, <ref target='Pg395'>395</ref>, <ref target='Pg399'>399</ref>, <ref target='Pg407'>407</ref>, <ref target='Pg409'>409</ref>, <ref target='Pg411'>411</ref>, <ref target='Pg413'>413</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mardonius, <ref target='Pg169'>169</ref>, <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref>, <ref target='Pg461'>461</ref>, <ref target='Pg463'>463</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Marinus, <ref target='Pg257'>257</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Marius, Caius, <ref target='Pg383'>383</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Martial, <ref target='Pg349'>349</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Matthew</hi>, Gospel of, <ref target='Pg007'>7</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maxentius, <ref target='Pg397'>397</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maximians, the, <ref target='Pg365'>365</ref>, <ref target='Pg367'>367</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maximus of Ephesus, <ref target='Pg151'>151</ref>, <ref target='Pg467'>467</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maximus of Tyre, <ref target='Pg071'>71</ref>, <ref target='Pg175'>175</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Medes, the, <ref target='Pg245'>245</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mediterranean, the, <ref target='Pg379'>379</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Megarian philosophy, <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Megarians, the, <ref target='Pg189'>189</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Memmorius, <ref target='Pg121'>121</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Menander the dramatist, <ref target='Pg433'>433</ref>, <ref target='Pg453'>453</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Menander the rhetorician, <ref target='Pg030'>30</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Menedemus, <ref target='Pg229'>229</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Messalina, <ref target='Pg355'>355</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Metroum, the, <ref target='Pg005'>5</ref>, <ref target='Pg019'>19</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Milan, <ref target='Pg257'>257</ref>, <ref target='Pg261'>261</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Milton, <ref target='Pg395'>395</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Minos, <ref target='Pg359'>359</ref>, <ref target='Pg361'>361</ref>, <ref target='Pg367'>367</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Misopogon, the</hi>, <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref>, <ref target='Pg371'>371</ref>, <ref target='Pg420'>420-511</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='517'/><anchor id='Pg517'/>

<lg>
<l>Mithras, <ref target='Pg415'>415</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mithridates, <ref target='Pg383'>383</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Moses, <ref target='Pg299'>299</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mother of the Gods, <ref target='Pg005'>5</ref>, <ref target='Pg113'>113</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Multan, <ref target='Pg401'>401</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Murray, <ref target='Pg069'>69</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Muses, the, <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref>, <ref target='Pg153'>153</ref>, <ref target='Pg157'>157</ref>, <ref target='Pg349'>349</ref>, <ref target='Pg421'>421</ref>, <ref target='Pg423'>423</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Musonius, <ref target='Pg233'>233</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mykonos, <ref target='Pg455'>455</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mysians, the, <ref target='Pg451'>451</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mysteries, the, <ref target='Pg103'>103</ref>, <ref target='Pg105'>105</ref>, <ref target='Pg107'>107</ref>, <ref target='Pg109'>109</ref>, <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref>, <ref target='Pg161'>161</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Narcissus, the freedman, <ref target='Pg355'>355</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nausicaa, <ref target='Pg461'>461</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Naxos, <ref target='Pg421'>421</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nebridius, <ref target='Pg281'>281</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nemesis, <ref target='Pg509'>509</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Neocles, <ref target='Pg207'>207</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nero, <ref target='Pg233'>233</ref>, <ref target='Pg355'>355</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nerva, <ref target='Pg357'>357</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nestor, <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nicolaus, <ref target='Pg233'>233</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nicomedia, <ref target='Pg200'>200</ref>, <ref target='Pg418'>418</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nireus, <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Octavian, <ref target='Pg351'>351</ref>, <ref target='Pg389'>389</ref>, <ref target='Pg397'>397</ref>, <ref target='Pg399'>399</ref>, <ref target='Pg405'>405</ref>, <ref target='Pg413'>413</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Odysseus, <ref target='Pg171'>171</ref>, <ref target='Pg189'>189</ref>, <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref>, <ref target='Pg441'>441</ref>, <ref target='Pg459'>459</ref>, <ref target='Pg461'>461</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oedipus, <ref target='Pg133'>133</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oenomaus, <ref target='Pg023'>23</ref>, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>, <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref>, <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Olympia, <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref>, <ref target='Pg093'>93</ref>, <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref>, <ref target='Pg159'>159</ref>, <ref target='Pg225'>225</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Olympus, <ref target='Pg109'>109</ref>, <ref target='Pg129'>129</ref>, <ref target='Pg147'>147</ref>, <ref target='Pg323'>323</ref>, <ref target='Pg325'>325</ref>, <ref target='Pg347'>347</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oreibasius, <ref target='Pg265'>265</ref>, <ref target='Pg467'>467</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Orpheus, <ref target='Pg099'>99</ref>, <ref target='Pg105'>105</ref>, <ref target='Pg167'>167</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Otho, <ref target='Pg355'>355</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Paeonians, the, <ref target='Pg451'>451</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pallas, the freedman, <ref target='Pg355'>355</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pan, <ref target='Pg083'>83</ref>, <ref target='Pg105'>105</ref>, <ref target='Pg113'>113</ref>, <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref>, <ref target='Pg425'>425</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Paris (Lutetia), <ref target='Pg241'>241</ref>, <ref target='Pg279'>279</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Parisians, the, <ref target='Pg429'>429</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Paros, <ref target='Pg421'>421</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Parthians, the, <ref target='Pg357'>357</ref>, <ref target='Pg387'>387</ref>, <ref target='Pg395'>395</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Patroclus, <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref>, <ref target='Pg459'>459</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Paul, St., <ref target='Pg309'>309</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Paul, a sycophant, <ref target='Pg277'>277</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Peirithous, <ref target='Pg173'>173</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Peleus, <ref target='Pg193'>193</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Penelope, <ref target='Pg457'>457</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pentadius, <ref target='Pg277'>277</ref>, <ref target='Pg281'>281</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pentheus, <ref target='Pg117'>117</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pericles, <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref>, <ref target='Pg181'>181</ref>, <ref target='Pg187'>187</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Peripatetics, the, <ref target='Pg025'>25</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Perseus, <ref target='Pg105'>105</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Persia, <ref target='Pg155'>155</ref>, <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref>, <ref target='Pg295'>295</ref>, <ref target='Pg387'>387</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Persia, king of, <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref>, <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref>, <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Persians, the, <ref target='Pg213'>213</ref>, <ref target='Pg385'>385</ref>, <ref target='Pg439'>439</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pertinax, <ref target='Pg359'>359</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Petavius, <ref target='Pg029'>29</ref>, <ref target='Pg030'>30</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Peter, St.</hi>, <ref target='Pg145'>145</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Petulantes, the, <ref target='Pg279'>279</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Peucestes, <ref target='Pg401'>401</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Phaeacians, the, <ref target='Pg435'>435</ref>, <ref target='Pg459'>459</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Phaedo, <ref target='Pg229'>229</ref>, <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Phaethon, <ref target='Pg083'>83</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Phalaris, <ref target='Pg357'>357</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Phemius, <ref target='Pg459'>459</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Philebus</hi>, the, <ref target='Pg155'>155</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Philippi, <ref target='Pg389'>389</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Philiscus, <ref target='Pg019'>19</ref>, <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Philostratus, <ref target='Pg301'>301</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Phoenicians, the, <ref target='Pg113'>113</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Phrygia, <ref target='Pg219'>219</ref>, <ref target='Pg431'>431</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Phryne, <ref target='Pg127'>127</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pindar, <ref target='Pg077'>77</ref>, <ref target='Pg113'>113</ref>, <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref>, <ref target='Pg301'>301</ref>, <ref target='Pg507'>507</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pittacus, <ref target='Pg205'>205</ref>, <ref target='Pg225'>225</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Plato, <ref target='Pg009'>9</ref>, <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref>, <ref target='Pg025'>25</ref>, <ref target='Pg027'>27</ref>, <ref target='Pg031'>31</ref>, <ref target='Pg039'>39</ref>, <ref target='Pg041'>41</ref>, <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref>, <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref>, <ref target='Pg070'>70</ref>, <ref target='Pg077'>77</ref>, <ref target='Pg079'>79</ref>, <ref target='Pg081'>81</ref>, <ref target='Pg093'>93</ref>, <ref target='Pg099'>99</ref>, <ref target='Pg101'>101</ref>, <ref target='Pg103'>103</ref>, <ref target='Pg105'>105</ref>, <ref target='Pg117'>117</ref>, <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref>, <ref target='Pg133'>133</ref>, <ref target='Pg139'>139</ref>, <ref target='Pg145'>145</ref>, <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref>, <ref target='Pg155'>155</ref>, <ref target='Pg157'>157</ref>, <ref target='Pg169'>169</ref>, <ref target='Pg173'>173</ref>, <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref>, <ref target='Pg181'>181</ref>, <ref target='Pg213'>213</ref>, <ref target='Pg221'>221</ref>, <ref target='Pg223'>223</ref>, <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref>, <ref target='Pg263'>263</ref>, <ref target='Pg307'>307</ref>, <ref target='Pg317'>317</ref>, <ref target='Pg325'>325</ref>, <ref target='Pg345'>345</ref>, <ref target='Pg347'>347</ref>, <ref target='Pg353'>353</ref>, <ref target='Pg363'>363</ref>, <ref target='Pg365'>365</ref>, <ref target='Pg369'>369</ref>, <ref target='Pg409'>409</ref>, <ref target='Pg457'>457</ref>, <ref target='Pg465'>465</ref>, <ref target='Pg467'>467</ref>, <ref target='Pg481'>481</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pliny, <ref target='Pg401'>401</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Plotinus, <ref target='Pg117'>117</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Plutarch, <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>, <ref target='Pg083'>83</ref>, <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref>, <ref target='Pg125'>125</ref>, <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref>, <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref>, <ref target='Pg245'>245</ref>, <ref target='Pg383'>383</ref>, <ref target='Pg385'>385</ref>, <ref target='Pg401'>401</ref>, <ref target='Pg423'>423</ref>, <ref target='Pg427'>427</ref>, <ref target='Pg447'>447</ref>, <ref target='Pg449'>449</ref>, <ref target='Pg477'>477</ref>, <ref target='Pg479'>479</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pnyx, the, <ref target='Pg207'>207</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Polemon, <ref target='Pg169'>169</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pompey, <ref target='Pg377'>377</ref>, <ref target='Pg381'>381</ref>, <ref target='Pg383'>383</ref>, <ref target='Pg385'>385</ref>, <ref target='Pg389'>389</ref>, <ref target='Pg405'>405</ref>, <ref target='Pg477'>477</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pontus, the, <ref target='Pg489'>489</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Porphyry, <ref target='Pg117'>117</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Portico, the, <ref target='Pg125'>125</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Poseidon, <ref target='Pg373'>373</ref>, <ref target='Pg389'>389</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Praechter, <ref target='Pg070'>70</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Priam, <ref target='Pg441'>441</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Priscus, <ref target='Pg467'>467</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Probus, <ref target='Pg363'>363</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Prodicus, <ref target='Pg070'>70</ref>, <ref target='Pg105'>105</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Prometheus, <ref target='Pg009'>9</ref>, <ref target='Pg041'>41</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Propontis, the, <ref target='Pg195'>195</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Protagoras</hi>, the, <ref target='Pg041'>41</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='518'/><anchor id='Pg518'/>

<lg>
<l>Protarchus, <ref target='Pg155'>155</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pylos, <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pyrrho, <ref target='Pg327'>327</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pyrrhus, <ref target='Pg387'>387</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pythagoras, <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref>, <ref target='Pg022'>22</ref>, <ref target='Pg025'>25</ref>, <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref>, <ref target='Pg041'>41</ref>, <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref>, <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref>, <ref target='Pg155'>155</ref>, <ref target='Pg161'>161</ref>, <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref>, <ref target='Pg195'>195</ref>, <ref target='Pg325'>325</ref>, <ref target='Pg353'>353</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pythagoreans, the, <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref>, <ref target='Pg155'>155</ref>, <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pythian oracle, <ref target='Pg011'>11</ref>, <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref>, <ref target='Pg023'>23</ref>, <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref>, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>, <ref target='Pg159'>159</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Quadi, the, <ref target='Pg271'>271</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Quirinus, <ref target='Pg347'>347</ref>, <ref target='Pg355'>355</ref>, <ref target='Pg367'>367</ref>, <ref target='Pg369'>369</ref>, <ref target='Pg383'>383</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rhadamanthus, <ref target='Pg363'>363</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rhea, <ref target='Pg349'>349</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rhine, the, <ref target='Pg269'>269</ref>, <ref target='Pg271'>271</ref>, <ref target='Pg273'>273</ref>, <ref target='Pg377'>377</ref>, <ref target='Pg423'>423</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rhodes, <ref target='Pg301'>301</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Romans, the, <ref target='Pg379'>379</ref>, <ref target='Pg385'>385</ref>, <ref target='Pg397'>397</ref>, <ref target='Pg471'>471</ref>, <ref target='Pg479'>479</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rome, <ref target='Pg241'>241</ref>, <ref target='Pg331'>331</ref>, <ref target='Pg391'>391</ref>, <ref target='Pg475'>475</ref>, <ref target='Pg479'>479</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Romulus, <ref target='Pg347'>347</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Salii, the, <ref target='Pg273'>273</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Sallust, Address to</hi>, <ref target='Pg166'>166-197</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sallust, <ref target='Pg069'>69</ref>, <ref target='Pg070'>70</ref>, <ref target='Pg121'>121</ref>, <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref>, <ref target='Pg277'>277</ref>, <ref target='Pg279'>279</ref>, <ref target='Pg343'>343</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Salmoneus, <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Samos, <ref target='Pg081'>81</ref>, <ref target='Pg155'>155</ref>, <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref>, <ref target='Pg447'>447</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sardis, <ref target='Pg435'>435</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sarmatians, the, <ref target='Pg271'>271</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Saturn, <ref target='Pg345'>345</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Satyrs, the, <ref target='Pg113'>113</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scipio Africanus, <ref target='Pg177'>177</ref>, <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scipios, the, <ref target='Pg383'>383</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scythians, the, <ref target='Pg245'>245</ref>, <ref target='Pg305'>305</ref>, <ref target='Pg391'>391</ref>, <ref target='Pg397'>397</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Selene, <ref target='Pg261'>261</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Seleucus, <ref target='Pg353'>353</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Semele, <ref target='Pg070'>70</ref>, <ref target='Pg109'>109</ref>, <ref target='Pg113'>113</ref>, <ref target='Pg115'>115</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Serapis, <ref target='Pg355'>355</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Serenianus, the Cynic, <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Severus, Emperor, <ref target='Pg359'>359</ref>, <ref target='Pg367'>367</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sextus Empiricus, <ref target='Pg029'>29</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sextus Pompeius, <ref target='Pg389'>389</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sicilians, the, <ref target='Pg313'>313</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Silenus, <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref>, <ref target='Pg349'>349</ref>, <ref target='Pg351'>351</ref>, <ref target='Pg353'>353</ref>, <ref target='Pg355'>355</ref>, <ref target='Pg357'>357</ref>, <ref target='Pg359'>359</ref>, <ref target='Pg361'>361</ref>, <ref target='Pg363'>363</ref>, <ref target='Pg365'>365</ref>, <ref target='Pg369'>369</ref>, <ref target='Pg373'>373</ref>, <ref target='Pg393'>393</ref>, <ref target='Pg395'>395</ref>, <ref target='Pg399'>399</ref>, <ref target='Pg401'>401</ref>, <ref target='Pg403'>403</ref>, <ref target='Pg405'>405</ref>, <ref target='Pg407'>407</ref>, <ref target='Pg409'>409</ref>, <ref target='Pg411'>411</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Silvanus, <ref target='Pg257'>257</ref>, <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Simmias, <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Simonides, <ref target='Pg407'>407</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sinope, <ref target='Pg005'>5</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sirens, the, <ref target='Pg167'>167</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sirmium, <ref target='Pg257'>257</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Smicrines, <ref target='Pg453'>453</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Socrates, <ref target='Pg005'>5</ref>, <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref>, <ref target='Pg025'>25</ref>, <ref target='Pg027'>27</ref>, <ref target='Pg031'>31</ref>, <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref>, <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref>, <ref target='Pg157'>157</ref>, <ref target='Pg159'>159</ref>, <ref target='Pg161'>161</ref>, <ref target='Pg169'>169</ref>, <ref target='Pg173'>173</ref>, <ref target='Pg175'>175</ref>, <ref target='Pg189'>189</ref>, <ref target='Pg207'>207</ref>, <ref target='Pg217'>217</ref>, <ref target='Pg229'>229</ref>, <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref>, <ref target='Pg313'>313</ref>, <ref target='Pg365'>365</ref>, <ref target='Pg465'>465</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Solon, <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>, <ref target='Pg205'>205</ref>, <ref target='Pg225'>225</ref>, <ref target='Pg435'>435</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sophroniscus, <ref target='Pg229'>229</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sparta, <ref target='Pg241'>241</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Spartacus, <ref target='Pg383'>383</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stoa, the, <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stoics, the, <ref target='Pg017'>17</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stratonice, <ref target='Pg449'>449</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Suetonius, <ref target='Pg351'>351</ref>, <ref target='Pg353'>353</ref>, <ref target='Pg381'>381</ref>, <ref target='Pg389'>389</ref>, <ref target='Pg391'>391</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sulla, <ref target='Pg383'>383</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sura, <ref target='Pg393'>393</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Synesius, <ref target='Pg427'>427</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Syracuse, <ref target='Pg313'>313</ref>, <ref target='Pg405'>405</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Syria, <ref target='Pg509'>509</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Syrians, the, <ref target='Pg451'>451</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tacitus, <ref target='Pg233'>233</ref>, <ref target='Pg353'>353</ref>, <ref target='Pg355'>355</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tarentum, <ref target='Pg471'>471</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tartarus, <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref>, <ref target='Pg139'>139</ref>, <ref target='Pg323'>323</ref>, <ref target='Pg325'>325</ref>, <ref target='Pg355'>355</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Taurus, <ref target='Pg287'>287</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Telamon, <ref target='Pg113'>113</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Teos, <ref target='Pg499'>499</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Termerus, <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thebans, the, <ref target='Pg379'>379</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thebes, <ref target='Pg025'>25</ref>, <ref target='Pg333'>333</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Themistius, Letter to</hi>, <ref target='Pg202'>202-237</ref>, <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref>, <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref>, <ref target='Pg103'>103</ref>, <ref target='Pg383'>383</ref>, <ref target='Pg391'>391</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Themistius, <ref target='Pg009'>9</ref>, <ref target='Pg071'>71</ref>, <ref target='Pg153'>153</ref>, <ref target='Pg167'>167</ref>, <ref target='Pg175'>175</ref>, <ref target='Pg200'>200</ref>, <ref target='Pg201'>201</ref>, <ref target='Pg363'>363</ref>, <ref target='Pg391'>391</ref>, <ref target='Pg423'>423</ref>, <ref target='Pg489'>489</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Themistocles, <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref>, <ref target='Pg245'>245</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Theocritus, <ref target='Pg155'>155</ref>, <ref target='Pg177'>177</ref>, <ref target='Pg189'>189</ref>, <ref target='Pg197'>197</ref>, <ref target='Pg357'>357</ref>, <ref target='Pg399'>399</ref>, <ref target='Pg425'>425</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Theodosius, <ref target='Pg200'>200</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Theognis, <ref target='Pg107'>107</ref>, <ref target='Pg185'>185</ref>, <ref target='Pg455'>455</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Theophilus, Governor of Antioch, <ref target='Pg491'>491</ref>, <ref target='Pg509'>509</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Theophrastus, <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref>, <ref target='Pg465'>465</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Theseus, <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref>, <ref target='Pg105'>105</ref>, <ref target='Pg173'>173</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thesmophoria, the, <ref target='Pg035'>35</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Thessalonians</hi>, <ref target='Pg145'>145</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thessaly, <ref target='Pg075'>75</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thrace, <ref target='Pg075'>75</ref>, <ref target='Pg183'>183</ref>, <ref target='Pg195'>195</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thracians, the, <ref target='Pg353'>353</ref>, <ref target='Pg391'>391</ref>, <ref target='Pg451'>451</ref>, <ref target='Pg457'>457</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thrasyleon, <ref target='Pg453'>453</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thrasyllus, <ref target='Pg233'>233</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thucydides, <ref target='Pg081'>81</ref>, <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tiberius, <ref target='Pg233'>233</ref>, <ref target='Pg353'>353</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tigris, the, <ref target='Pg387'>387</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Timaeus, <ref target='Pg157'>157</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Timaeus</hi>, the, <ref target='Pg155'>155</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='519'/><anchor id='Pg519'/>

<lg>
<l>Titus, <ref target='Pg357'>357</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Trajan, <ref target='Pg357'>357</ref>, <ref target='Pg369'>369</ref>, <ref target='Pg373'>373</ref>, <ref target='Pg395'>395</ref>, <ref target='Pg397'>397</ref>, <ref target='Pg405'>405</ref>, <ref target='Pg413'>413</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tralles, <ref target='Pg251'>251</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Trojans the, <ref target='Pg167'>167</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Troy, <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref>, <ref target='Pg441'>441</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Valerian, <ref target='Pg361'>361</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vespasian, <ref target='Pg355'>355</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vienne, <ref target='Pg267'>267</ref>, <ref target='Pg279'>279</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vindex, <ref target='Pg355'>355</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vitellius, <ref target='Pg355'>355</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vosges Mts., <ref target='Pg271'>271</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Xenophon, <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref>, <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref>, <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref>, <ref target='Pg105'>105</ref>, <ref target='Pg153'>153</ref>, <ref target='Pg181'>181</ref>, <ref target='Pg209'>209</ref>, <ref target='Pg229'>229</ref>, <ref target='Pg459'>459</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Xerxes, <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref>, <ref target='Pg173'>173</ref>, <ref target='Pg213'>213</ref>, <ref target='Pg461'>461</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zamolxis, <ref target='Pg175'>175</ref>, <ref target='Pg353'>353</ref>, <ref target='Pg393'>393</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zeller, <ref target='Pg200'>200</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zeno, <ref target='Pg025'>25</ref>, <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref>, <ref target='Pg177'>177</ref>, <ref target='Pg325'>325</ref>, <ref target='Pg351'>351</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zeus, <ref target='Pg017'>17</ref>, <ref target='Pg041'>41</ref>, <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref>, <ref target='Pg083'>83</ref>, <ref target='Pg093'>93</ref>, <ref target='Pg105'>105</ref>, <ref target='Pg109'>109</ref>, <ref target='Pg111'>111</ref>, <ref target='Pg113'>113</ref>, <ref target='Pg115'>115</ref>, <ref target='Pg135'>135</ref>, <ref target='Pg137'>137</ref>, <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref>, <ref target='Pg145'>145</ref>, <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref>, <ref target='Pg197'>197</ref>, <ref target='Pg283'>283</ref>, <ref target='Pg305'>305</ref>, <ref target='Pg307'>307</ref>, <ref target='Pg351'>351</ref>, <ref target='Pg367'>367</ref>, <ref target='Pg369'>369</ref>, <ref target='Pg395'>395</ref>, <ref target='Pg409'>409</ref>, <ref target='Pg411'>411</ref>, <ref target='Pg413'>413</ref>, <ref target='Pg445'>445</ref>, <ref target='Pg467'>467</ref>, <ref target='Pg475'>475</ref>, (Kasios) <ref target='Pg487'>487</ref>, <ref target='Pg499'>499</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zonaras, <ref target='Pg425'>425</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zosimus, <ref target='Pg241'>241</ref></l>
</lg>

</div>

</body>
<back rend="page-break-before: right">
  <div id="footnotes">
    <index index="toc" />
    <index index="pdf" />
    <head>Footnotes</head>
    <divGen type="footnotes"/>
  </div>
  <div rend="page-break-before: right">
    <divGen type="pgfooter" />
  </div>
</back>
</text>
</TEI.2>
